LANGUAGE HACKING GUIDE
by Benny Lewis
Table of contents:
INTRODUCTION
Part 1: Mentality
Motivation
Why are you learning this language?
Making sure you have a good first impression
But I'll make mistakes!
The right attitude
Not being born naturally talented
Part 2. Plan of action
Mission
Steps needed
Mini-goals
Defining your targets
Make a language log
Part 3: Communicating from Day One
When will I be ready to speak the language?
A language is more than input and output
Non-verbal communication
How to communicate with natives with very little learned
At home / in-country immersion
Spoken immersion
Getting into the flow of speaking immediately
Necessary frustration
Hack for getting over unfamiliarity with a foreign language
It's important to make mistakes
Study Triage
Getting over the Plateau
Part 4: Speaking with natives
Just ask
PAGEPage 1
NUMBER
3
4
4
5
6
7
7
9
11
11
12
12
13
14
16
16
17
18
19
22
23
25
27
27
29
30
31
33
33
The human aspect
Too shy to speak
Conversational connectors
Taking on several languages
Part 5: Learning Resources
Improving memory
Image association
Using music to remember phrases
Making time
Free ways to find natives without travelling
online resources
Part 6: Particular Language issues
Why do they have to have word genders?
Instant vocabulary
Accent reduction
Interviews
Conclusion
34
36
37
39
41
41
41
44
45
47
48
51
51
52
53
54
55
Page 2
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
My name is Benny (Brendan) Lewis. I’m a vegetarian from Cavan, Ireland and I don't drink. I like
tothink of myself a “technomad” -- a full-time technology-enabled globe-trotter.
I have had plenty of other jobs in the last decade such as English teacher, Mathematics teacher,
French/Spanish teacher, photographer, youth hostel receptionist, tour guide, yoga store
manager, first aid assistant, electronic engineer and several others. Before attempting to support
myself from sales of this guide, I was a location independent freelance translator.
My goal is to earn enough from sales, and from private language coaching, to hopefully
eventually be able to live comfortably in Moscow and Tokyo, each one for 3 months (and
unfortunately, the two most expensive capital cities in the world!) to learn Russian and Japanese.
Until then, I will continue choosing cheap destinations for my 3-month language missions.
I am sure that the contents of this book, translations, worksheets and interviews can help you a
lot, as these ideas have completely changed my life over the last decade and opened up a whole
new amazing world of language learning and communication with people across the world.
Thank you so much for your purchase and enjoy hacking your target language!
INTRODUCTION
When I turned 21, the only language I spoke was English. I had taken German and Irish in school,
but received low grades in both. This meant that I considered myself totally untalented in languages
and simply accepted that I would never speak anything but English my entire life. My university
studies were in Electronic Engineering.
However, I moved to Spain after graduation and loved the culture so much that I decided I wanted
to get to know it better by understanding the actual people from Spain – and not just those who
spoke English.
Over six months, I tried quite a lot of things to learn Spanish, mostly only casually, and mostly just
using standard courses. After all this time I still only had a few scattered words, phrases and
grammar rules – not very useful. Then one day I decided to really devote myself to the project and
tried some unconventional approaches never recommended in most courses.
Thus, language hacking was born!
I'm certainly not the only language hacker out there. Many others before me have learned languages
quickly too. I have met a lot of these people in my travels and learned loads from them, and have
even included interviews in this guide with some of the Internet's most well-known language
learners to hear what they have to say about approaches that have helped them learn many
languages more quickly and more efficiently than the average learner.
This guide includes some of the most important lessons learned on my language journey to date. In
sharing my struggles, I hope to spare other language learners from the frustrations I went throughget to this point. Too many people spend years learning a language without even being able to
converse beyond the basics, and I want to help them.
I'm proposing that you can start speaking the language immediately, and in a matter of months, you
can speak it very well if you learn it the right way. The contents of this guide share some of the
many free possibilities and methods available to anyone who wishes to quickly reach the stage of
being able to converse with natives in a foreign language, whether abroad or in your home town.
The feeling of truly understanding a culture by being able to talk to the actual people in that culture
Pageto
3
is within many people's reach. I hope the advice in these pages (and audio) will help you to achieve
that dream!
PART 1: MENTALITY
A journey of a thousand miles begins with a single step, and learning a language is quite a trip!
You have obviously made the most important decision of all in this journey – the commitmentlearn, but where you go from here depends on so many factors.
I've gone through the process several times over the last decade, and made some good decisions
(and some really bad ones) in terms of speaking languages. I've learned from all of these, and
continue to learn from them.
In this guide, I'll be outlining precisely what has enabled me to learn a new language and achieve
fluency in that language in a very short amount of time.
I'm writing the guide as if I were talking to me as a 21-year-old; uncomfortable with strangers, not
confident in my abilities in many things, and above all – convinced I would never speak a foreign
language.
My journey over the last seven years has been an amazing one (and it continues) and I wouldn't
change what I experienced for anything. But it would have been a lot easier and more fun if I had
access to the information in this guide. I'd have wasted less time too.
Being open to learning how to speak a language fluently in a short period of time is not just a matter
of which study materials you use or how much you learn, but is largely influenced by your attitude
and motivation.
To prepare yourself to make huge strides in a language, you absolutely must have the right
mentality. The best learning techniques in the world and most expensive courses would and have
been wasted on people with the wrong mentality.
to
MOTIVATION
Just wanting to learn a language isn't enough.
Sorry to break it to you, but pretty much everyone in the world would be quite happy to speak a
foreign language if it required no work. In fact, I don't think that I have ever met someone who
doesn't “want” to speak another language.
With nothing more than a casual interest, you have little chance of achieving much in a short time. I
have come across countless expats and people on summer study programmes who achieve nothing
impressive over months or years of exposure to a language.
This is because they don't need to. They use their native tongue (e.g. English) with all of their
friends, with their boy/girlfriend or husband/wife/children, in all of their e-mails, reading all of their
books and watching all of their TV shows and movies (downloaded or otherwise).
Expats are often not fully immersed in the language/culture overseas, which is why they don't learn
despite months or years of exposure. But this is good news for language learners who don't live in
countries where their target language is spoken!
Page 4
If expats can create a language bubble for themselves abroad to preserve their native language, why
can't the rest of us create language bubbles at home to learn a new language?
The answer is simple – you don't want it that much. For example, speaking Spanish with your
boy/girlfriend who will join you on a trip to South America soon isn't “necessary”, because it's
easier to speak the language both of you are used to. It would be weird to do otherwise.
One of the biggest revelations I made in learning a language was this idea of changing the want
aspect to be a need. How I did this myself in the real world is something I'll get into later. But for
the moment, it's important to appreciate the crucial difference.
When you need to speak a language, it's more than just casually hoping to speak it someday. It's a
genuine desire to have that language completely fill up your life and even take it over. This level of
investment is not something casual learners are familiar with.
SUMMARY:
Change your want mentality to a need mentality
WHY ARE YOU LEARNING THIS LANGUAGE?
There are many reasons why someone may want to speak a language, and these vary depending on
the person.
Maybe you want to discover your roots? You have a passion for travel? You want to pass an exam?
Or maybe you are just very interested in languages and in expanding your horizons.
These are excellent long-term motivators, but to be honest they are not going to help you reach
fluency quickly.
Each one of these reasons are vague, and with no specific (or a very distant) time limit. You may
have one big reason that simply cannot be broken down into achievable chunks, and this makes it
impossible to measure your progress
This is why I don't actually aim for the end-goal (for me, usually fluency). Instead, I create very
short-term projects that are realistic and give me a sense of progress and achievement.
This creates pressure and a need to achieve something tangible in the short term. This need is
simply not present in most language courses. Examinations are a somewhat useful way to create a
need, but most academic courses are not actually tied to realistic use of the language. Impressive
grammar and vocabulary still don't mean you can actually communicate, and I have come across
many people with high academic levels in a language who still feel unprepared to speak.
Even though my end-goal might be something along the lines of “fluent in three months”, my short-
term aims are things like “buy a SIM card this afternoon”, “learn words related to the Internet so I
can attend a talk on Wikipedia and get the gist of it”, or “be able to get from the airport to my hotel
using no English”.
These aims do not require months of investment. They are very specific and can be prepared for in
just a few hours once starting to learn a language, using techniques I'll discuss later.
If you achieve your aim, it doesn't matter if you stumble, pause, don't understanding everything, or
even frustrate the other person (which has happened to me very rarely and I'll explain how you can
avoid this). You will have achieved what you aimed for.
SUMMARY:
Have practical short-term aims with your language
Page 5
MAKING SURE YOU HAVE A GOOD FIRST IMPRESSION
You may think (especially if you have attended certain academic, and even modern software/online
courses) that learning a language mostly involves two things: grammar and vocabulary. This is
false.
In my opinion, the most important aspect of being able to speak a language is your confidence in
your ability to use the language.
You can come up with technical reasons why German or Chinese or Swedish or Russian or
whatever is the “hardest” language in the world, but this is a waste of time. It doesn't matter what
language you take on, it will be the hardest language for you if you keep focusing precisely on what
makes it hard. It will always be as hard as you think it is.
I have met countless people who are potentially way more “naturally” intelligent than I am, and yet
they make little progress in a second language because all they ever do is list the reasons holding
them back from speaking it.
They constantly focus on these unpleasant points, so their attitude towards the language is totally
messed up. A language hacker does the exact opposite and focuses on the positive from the start.
To illustrate the point, imagine this:
I am going to introduce you to a friend of mine, but I tell you a bit about him first. Just before I
introduce you, I say that he hates children, is opinionated, he farts when he's nervous and has a
really annoying laugh. All of this may be true, but it would be very mean of me to do that and ruin
his chance to make his own first impression. It also means that you are going to be a bit
apprehensive and maybe not so interested in getting to know him, since you already know some of
these annoying things about him.
Then I go to someone else and tell him about the same guy – I say that he works for NASA, is very
kind, has a great sense of humour, and has some interesting stories about travelling through Africa
working for charities, all of which would also be true. In this case, my friend would be well-
received and would be an instant hit. Eventually, new friends of his would discover some of the
annoying parts of his personality, but they'll accept these as just part of the package of what this
person is. They will accept these faults as all friends do.
Why can't we do the same thing for languages?
I look at a language as a friend I want to get to know better, rather than an enemy I have to conquer.
I find any excuse to make “him” look good, and I will defend his honour if he is insulted. In the last
part of this guide I list reasons why certain aspects of languages (vocabulary, genders etc.) are easy
to learn. These languages are my friends and I want you to see the good side of them.
For example, if you tell me that French is too hard because it has masculine and feminine nouns, I'll
tell you that it's easy because it has a vast amount of vocabulary the same as in English, and counter
your argument by saying that word-endings makes remembering masculine and feminine pretty
straightforward.
If you tell me some Asian languages have strange tone rules, I'll tell you that they aren't that bad if
you look at them specifically to see how they can be easy, and I'll continue to say that they (mostly)
don't have cases, noun genders, conjugations, adjective agreement, complicated word orders, or
some other difficult feature as found in other languages.
And in those other languages I'll give you reasons why those features aren't that bad. Whatever it
takes to portray the language I'm currently interested in as not that hard. If you make fun of my
friend behind his back, then I will defend him as any good friend would. If you want your target
language to be your friend, you need to treat it like one!
Page 6
This has been a major reason for my success in learning languages quickly, and most people
looking at it from the outside will presume that you are simply smarter than them because to you the
language is easy. But this is a shift in mentality, not a shift in IQ.
SUMMARY:
Stop thinking about how hard your target language is; that will get you nowhere! Focus on the
positive!
BUT I'LL MAKE MISTAKES!
The “hard” aspects of a language certainly cannot be ignored. This is why I suggest looking at them
differently and appreciating them.
However, no matter how you look at languages, it takes time to get used to aspects that are different
from your mother tongue. This means that making mistakes is inevitable.
If you accept this, then in the early stages you don't even have to worry so much about knowing the
hardest part of a language. It's much better to get a feel for it, as it is used, rather than a feel for its
grammar.
For example, if an English learner ignored subject/object differences and said, That phone call is
for 'I' (rather than 'me'), I could definitely forgive him if he had only been learning English for a
few weeks. In fact, I'd be impressed that he was saying anything considering the little time
investment.
Your focus should be on getting your point across and understanding most of what is said back to
you.
If the above learner spent months learning grammar first and after six months knew to say “me”
rather than “I”, he would not have achieved anything greater in terms of communication. He may be
speaking better, but saying an incorrect sentence after one week of studying at least means that he is
communicating despite the little time investment.
Communication is what a language is for after all! Even if you are ultimately studying for an
examination, if you don't appreciate this point, then it's only a list of grammar rules and vocabulary
tables. That's not a language; language is a means of communicating with people, and even if you
don't do it 100 percent perfectly at first, you can certainly still communicate.
So, make mistakes and don't worry about it! You can't learn to walk confidently if you don't
stumble a little first.
It's also essential to use mistakes as an opportunity to learn, and not as an obstacle. I like to simply
'edit' out the mistakes from my memory if I have indeed learned from them – this way I see the path
behind me as nothing more than progress.
SUMMARY: Mistakes are a natural part of the learning process, accept that they will happen and
know that this will not prevent you from communicating.
THE RIGHT ATTITUDE
In years of learning languages, I have come across a lot of other learners and seen some of them
learn much quicker than I had. I have, of course, learned huge amounts from them.
Unfortunately, quite a lot of people I have come across don't seem to be succeeding in learning
languages at all (or a guide like this wouldn't need to be written). And you know what? I've learned
a lot from them too. I've learned precisely how you should not learn a language.
Page 7
You know what nearly all of them have in common? They focus on the negative aspects of the
language they are learning. Their glass (or more appropriately, their language) is half empty instead
of being half full.
Sorry if that sounds like I'm simplifying things too much, but I honestly believe this is one of the
biggest differences between successful and unsuccessful language learners. Being realistic is
important, but language slackers (the opposite of language hackers) focus on these details almost to
the level of an obsession.
Language slackers will find very imaginative ways of justifying why the language learning
challenge is not possible for them. They will give you a list of reasons that hold them back (or you
back if they are “generous” enough to share this negativity when they hear of your project), and
when they see someone achieve what they claim is impossible, then they will dismiss that person as
an exception or as a genius. This is nothing short of laziness.
When they list different parts of a language (the many cases of Slavic languages, gender in Latin
languages, tones in Asian languages, etc.) they will remind you how hard these are. And you know
what? Technically they are right – work is indeed involved in learning these aspects that you are not
familiar with and the glass is indeed half empty. That is not a falsehood.
They can even go further and provide evidence to back up their proof of how hard it is. For
example, they personally tried to study a language in school for over a decade and don't speak it, so
learning a language quickly is not possible. Technically they aren't “wrong”.
Even if they tell you the language you are learning is the “hardest in the world” they aren't wrong!
Every language is the hardest one in the world if you look at it that way. “Hard” is relative - like big
or beautiful - and depend on the observer.
But using this weird logic and being obsessed with how hard it is will not help you to actually
achieve anything. So, of course, I'm suggesting that your glass be half full. Optimism and a positive
attitude are crucial aspects to language hacking.
I don't tend to label issues in a language as difficult – they are just different. And since a language is
my friend I will go further and tell you how great it is, as outlined above.
“Bad news” will come your way, and you have to learn how to filter this for essential facts rather
than opinions of level of difficulty.
For example, when I heard that Czech had seven cases, I could have spent a lot of time whining
about those damn cases (and I have met a lot of people who do take this approach). But that doesn't
help! I promise you, no amount of complaining will ever bring you closer to fluency. It's a pity it
doesn't, because a lot of people are excellent complainers.
Anything that holds you back from progress needs to be eliminated, and being pessimistic is high
on that list!
With Czech, I just thought “oh well!” and I spoke with the wrong case at first, but I studied to
improve, and looked for patterns to help make studying easier.
And you know what? I got through it and was pretty confidently able to use the seven cases in
conversations.
This is another reason why I tend to focus very little on grammar in the early stages. Seeing how
much work needs to be done is intimidating – I jump straight into speaking (aware that I'm making
plenty of mistakes) and come to grammar a little later. And you know what happens? It's no longer
a scary monster that needs to be slain, it's actually interesting because I'm familiar with it.
Making grammar more fun in my own way ensures that as I progress, I feel positive about it the
entire time. This positivity creates a snowball effect to provide consistent momentum to guarantee
that I will continue to improve.
Page 8
Whether you think you can or you think you can’t, you’re right - Henry Ford
NOT BEING BORN NATURALLY TALENTED
This is yet another very popular mentality that holds people back from trying to learn languages: the
fact that they aren't talented enough, or that they aren't lucky enough to be rich/smart/free.
It's very easy to look at someone like me, or many others, who have successfully learned to speak
foreign languages and dismiss us as naturally talented or lucky. In fact, I did the very same thing
myself until I really tried to actually learn a language. Now I have a very different concept of what
talent and luck mean.
You can tell me all about genetics and background advantages, but at the end of the day no matter
what excuse you can come up with, someone has overcome it before you, and successfully achieved
their dreams. The difference is that these people kept really trying or thought of clever ways to get
around their issues. Most of their secrets are not so secret, you just have to find their story or
discover your own path.
As an example, let me quickly tell you the true story of someone with incredible setbacks, who still
managed to learn French, German, Greek, and Latin and achieve a hell of a lot more.
She was born in Alabama, U.S.A. in 1880 and went to the Radchliffe College, the women's branch
of Harvard. Back then, most women were not expected to ever leave their town or do anything more
than get married and raise kids, and anything else probably would have been even less common in
Alabama.
As well as this, she went on to write a book that was translated to 25 languages, met every U.S.
president in her lifetime and become a close friend to Alexander Graham Bell and Mark Twain.
Quite the accomplishments, right? It's easy to think that she must have been born lucky – most
people would never achieve these kinds of things, especially as a woman in her time. Maybe she
was just lucky?
Hardly. She achieved all of this and more despite being deaf and blind from the age of eighteen
months and could barely talk. Her name was Helen Keller.
Can you imagine how difficult her struggle must have been? I definitely couldn't even begin to
dream of ever being able to relate to it. Her inspirational story shows that rather than telling herself
that she was a victim and constantly reminding herself how unfair her life was - as many people
would have done in her situation - she lived an incredible life and achieved some amazing things.
Like all humans she would have had her weak moments, but she went on despite them.
No matter what is holding you back, you can overcome it.
Whenever I have this nagging doubt that one of my dreams is “impossible”, such as speaking a
foreign language that I'm completely unfamiliar with or travelling with very little money, etc. I
think of people like her who achieved much more against way more insurmountable odds and how
pathetic my excuses are in comparison. There are hundreds of examples, and every problem has a
solution if you are innovative enough. The issue isn't the problem itself, it's the person facing it and
how serious they are about overcoming it.
I don’t care what your excuse is, if you are devoted enough you will find a way around it.
This is all part of the change in perspective that has helped me make so much progress in languages
in recent years. Rather than categorise people as lucky or unlucky, talented or untalented, you have
to see how you can achieve what those 'lucky' people have.
Sometimes they do have actual advantages that make it easier, but that's their story, not yours. You
happen to have certain advantages that millions of other people don't. You can find your own path
Page 9
to any goal, and fluency in a language is definitely one of them. There are no lucky horseshoes,
stars aligning, or witchcraft etc. at play here.
Later in the guide I give a few examples of suggestions for getting around typical problems, like not
having enough time, joining in on conversations despite not speaking much, etc.
However, if you have your own nagging doubts (married with children, in too much debt, failed
languages in school etc.) that you think will hold you back, then think to yourself how likely it is
that someone else has faced the same issue as you before but found a way around it.
SUMMARY: Using luck, talent or genes is not a good excuse. You can overcome challenges to
reach your goal.
Page 10
PART 2 - PLAN OF ACTION
MISSION
My end-goal usually tends to be fluency, or sometimes (more recently) accent reduction. But to
start off, most people would be more than happy to aim for basic or intermediate level conversation
skills first.
However, no matter what you are aiming for you need a plan of action. Rather than a New Year's
resolution or, even worse, an I'd like to or I hope to, I have missions.
This is more than just a change of words; a mission is an urgent plan-of-action to achieve your
target, and the process involved is completely different.
I'm sure you've had many tasks you may have aimed for before; give up smoking, join the gym,
stop watching TV, use the stairs rather than the elevator, etc. Some of these imply a dramatic
change in habit and many people don't realise how hard this is to maintain.
There are some interesting tips on 30-day trials in the audio interview with Scott Young, so check
that out for another perspective on changing broader seemingly difficult tasks into smaller, more
achievable chunks.
The problem with an objective like speak fluently in three months / six months / a year is that it is
too vague and none have any strategy incorporated in them. I've met a lot of people with New
Year's resolutions to speak Spanish/French,... etc. by the end of the year and they almost never
achieve it.
This is because they haven't defined speak, and because the end of the year is so far away that they
can constantly leave doing any work until “later”, and even if they make it a shorter timespan, they
still might just be doing nothing more than telling themselves that they'd like to.
You need a strategy. This guide gives you some advice in particular strategies that have worked for
me, but there have been a huge amount of language learners that have done it in very different other
clever ways (such as Khatzumoto, whom I've also interviewed). What we all have in common is not
necessarily the strategies themselves, but the fact that we HAVE them. We all have a plan and we
stick to it. Even someone with an inefficient strategy (and lets face it, no strategy is perfect) will
achieve so much more than someone with the best ideas that never get implemented.
If you read this entire guide and listen to all of the interviews and come away with a sense of what
is involved in learning a language, then I feel like nothing important will actually have been
achieved. You need to apply these. I'm serious!
Right now, make a plan of the next months and the realistic objectives you want to achieve in your
language. Do you want to be able to understand most of what is said in TV shows within six
months? Write it down! Want to be able to make it up to at least 20 seconds into a conversation
with a native and still be able to continue confidently? Write it down!
There are a couple of exercises I've included in the worksheet with this guide that should help you,
and this is one of them. Print it out or copy it by hand, but don't just do it on your computer. Having
something written down and on the desk or in your pocket can be an excellent reminder to keep you
working towards those goals.
I'm all about technology, but having something in the physical world makes a huge difference. That
sheet of paper with my list of objectives that I have cello-taped to my table is not going away, even
when I shut off my PC.
If you haven't started writing already, why are you still reading this? You should have written down
your goals by now! I'm not joking, start it now and add to it or refine it if you see something else in
Page 11
this guide, but be clear about what you're aiming for.
Summary:
All the best ideas in the world are worth nothing if they aren't implemented.
STEPS NEEDED
Once you have the end-goal in mind, the way you can come up with your strategy is to break it up
into the components needed to reach it.
See the end-goal as a definite. It simply will happen, so work backwards to see the logical steps
needed that would have helped you reach that goal. Get rid of this idea of maybe and work to make
it happen.
Taking the example I mentioned above, if you want to understand TV shows, you need to make
sure that listening is the focus of your mission. Maybe you'll jump straight in and listen to native
TV series from the start and force yourself to sink or swim (this method has been effective for
Khatzumoto, in the interviews), or maybe you'll listen to materials prepared for language learners to
ease yourself in, get used to slower speech, and start (I personally mix both up, which by no means
is “better”, it has just been the most enjoyable way for me). Each of these approaches has its own
advantages and reasons, but what's important is the fact that you are genuinely devoted to it.
For the deep-end approach, you need to set aside time every day to expose yourself to the language
as much as possible, and make sure you are doing something active to increase your understanding.
Have the TV shows downloaded or recorded, waiting to be watched so there are no excuses to miss
a single session.
For the gradual approach, you need to have the materials ready and be even more devoted to make
sure you can get through them quickly. Basic, very slowly spoken audio does a poor job at helping
you understand real and natural speech, but when its difficulty is increased incrementally but
quickly it can help a lot. Make the overall time shorter by doing it intensively (since what you are
doing is easier) so you start practising on your end-goal (watching TV) long before the deadline.
This is just one example; whatever your end-goal is, break it up into the steps involved so that you
know you will make progress every day.
When you have a time set aside every day, then you can go to the next step of MINI-GOALS.
MINI-GOALS
A mini-goal is a target that you can achieve in one sitting (or standing, as the case may be)!
The problem with aiming to speak well some day, or even this time next year is that it is too distant
to feel real and can therefore easily be ignored. You need deadlines, even if they are within your
own mind. And the best deadlines are looming ones. You can't really get less distant than TODAY.
Rather than aiming to eventually have a good scope of vocabulary, learn all words related to body
parts (for example) within 30 minutes. What has been very effective for me is having a very
conspicuous countdown timer – if I'm working on my computer, 25 percent of the entire screen is
just the digital countdown, with the seconds constantly flashing at me, lest I forget!
Rather than aiming to eliminate your accent, work on rolling your 'r' for the next three days,
studying tongue positions, repeating training videos on Youtube and getting natives to correct you
(in person or via Skype).
These are parts that eventually add up to achieving your end-goal, and they are very much
Page 12
achievable if you put in that short-term devotion. It's easy to dismiss people as language geniuses,
but all they are doing is a large amount of these easy tasks. When brought together, all MINI-
GOALS will add to the end-goal when planned out correctly, but each task individually is very
much achievable by anyone else.
With a very efficient strategy and genuine devotion to the project, your hopes become a mission.
Summary:
Break up your monthly/weekly plans into smaller chunks that can be achieved immediately
DEFINING YOUR TARGETS
One of the most important aspects of your mission is to be very specific about what you are aiming
for. You want to understand the radio? Not good enough – say that you want to understand at least
half of what is being said and be able to explain it to someone afterwards.
Perhaps you want to be able to get by for your first week in a country? This is a fine target to aim
for but once again, the vagueness makes it too fuzzy to aim for – be specific! You specifically want
to have the phrases for asking directions/ordering food etc... getting a useful gist of responses, the
ability to remember some basic words, or whatever else you plan on.
If you cannot describe your target in great detail, it is not a target – it is nothing more than a fuzzy
cloud and that will not help you if you want a plan of action to reach it.
Having a short answer for brevity is fine, but you must know what this means to yourself. For
example, I tend to aim for fluency in a language. This is the quick one-word answer I give people.
However, I have a very specific definition of what this means to me and try to make sure other
people do, at least to themselves.
If you happen to be aiming for fluency too, you may fall down the trap that many people do and
imagine it to be equal to perfection. Aiming for perfection is a mistake because by its very nature
you will never reach it. It is discouraging and unhelpful to have a target so vague and high that you
will simply never get there.
So, what does fluency mean to me? Of course, different people define this word in different ways.
But as far as I'm concerned it is nothing like speaking perfectly, being equivalent to a native, or
being able to talk about any topic in your target language.
I can't talk about “any topic” in English, so you can bet I don't aim to do so in other languages. As
nice as that would be, it's unrealistic and unnecessary. If girls talk about shoes or if architects talk
about baroque building styles, both will use vocabulary I don't understand (brand names and
technical terminology), and despite these setbacks I can still claim to speak English as a native. I
can also admit that if it weren't for automatic spell-checking, this document would have quite a lot
of mistakes in it. If perfection isn't possible for natives, then why should us humble language
learners be aiming for it?
To me, “fluent” can be broken down until it's something I can aim for. Starting with the official
definition (I like to use the Oxford English dictionary):
1 speaking or writing in an articulate and natural manner.
2 (of a language) used easily and accurately.
As you can see, this doesn't imply any perfection or native-equivalence. Used easily and accurately
is something that us mere humans can indeed aim for.
To be even more specific, I consider myself speaking fluently if I can get my point across while
making very few mistakes (but still making mistakes), understand almost everything said to me in
Page 13
normal conversations, and follow natives speaking amongst one another when not talking about
very specific topics that I generally wouldn't talk about in my native language.
To me, fluency is perhaps 90-95 percent “perfect”, and that is an excellent level to reach and to be
very proud of. That extra 5+ percent is not necessary for most people, especially in the short term. I
aim to reduce that as much as possible over the long term, but in less than a year 90 percent perfect
is very much achievable if you are devoted enough.
If the language project is your full time devotion, you can do this in a short number of months.
So when you are defining your language learning goals you need to be as specific as possible:
number of months, precisely what basic conversation / intermediate / fluent means to you, number
of seconds you aim to chat to someone without asking what a word means – whatever you are
aiming for, define it.
If you just try to learn a language without knowing precisely where you are going and what you
need to focus on (Speaking? Listening? Reading? Understanding? Confidence to speak?) then it
will be very hard to get there. “Speak language x well” is not a target and doesn't allow for any plan
of action. If you have a destination in mind, then you can have a path to bring you there and focus
on a good strategy to make sure it happens.
So what are you really aiming for? Worksheet 2 requests a precise definition. Write as much as
possible!
MAKE A LANGUAGE LOG
A lot of what I discuss in this guide is based on over seven years of applied language learning, but
there are some aspects that I have learned even in the last year.
One of them is that success comes much easier if you have a language log. This is to document
your progress in a language, and share your struggle with others who are experiencing similar
problems. When you go through your journey alone, it is much easier to lose track of the goal and
even your motivation.
Being “public” about your mission gives you that extra edge of pressure if you blog about it. If
many people eventually start to read your blog, it adds an extra dimension to your strategy by
making sure you have some news to post when you update them.
Again, I'll say that simply reading this guide and listening to the audio won't get you very far unless
you apply what is suggested. So, once again I'll suggest that right now you start a language log
(a.k.a. a blog). Go to http://www.wordpress.com , click “sign up now” to get a free account, think of
an interesting name for the blog (based on the language objective – this isn't a space to share
Youtube cat videos!) and when you are in the main screen of the dashboard (after logging in) write
a “new post” to make your introduction post something similar to the answer you gave in the
worksheet for defining what you were aiming for. You can do all of this in just a couple of minutes.
If privacy really is an issue, then start a written journal or open a new word processing document to
record your journey, but commit yourself to updating it consistently. The main problem with doing
it this way however, is the lack of feedback and possible encouragement you could get from a blog.
To make sure more people come to check it out, write some interesting things you have discovered
in your language learning journey that can help others. That is basically what I have been doing to
make sure that I have others helping me with my difficult tasks. If it weren't for my blog, I would
not have been so successful in making huge leaps of progress in the last year.
Before that year I made pretty good progress, but it was less committed at times because I'd get
lazy. Now, when the temptation is there to just take a week off, I remember that my big monthly
update is coming up in a few days and I have to have something to show for it! I have also
Page 14
mentioned particular difficulties I have been having and got fantastic responses and links to
amazing resources that have greatly improved how quickly and efficiently I have learned.
The amount of readers doesn't matter. There were only a few dozen people looking at my blog in its
initial weeks and that was more than enough people I didn't want to let down. How do you get these
people to read your blog? Go comment on their blogs. This brings the extra advantage of exposing
you to someone else's story.
Don't worry about being a “good writer” – just write as you would speak. I could have started my
blog years ago, but didn't because I thought that how my English teacher graded me eleven years
ago affected how well I express myself now.
So is your language log ready? Have you already made your first entry? No? OK, I'll wait...
...
I'm still waiting – don't worry, I'm not going anywhere! Minimise this window or put aside the
printed document and go to your computer, then go to the above link or your other preference for
starting a language log, and write the first entry.
Done now? Good!
With the positive attitude, plan of action, and platform to make a log of your progress, you are all
set.
I think I have given you enough pep-talk, it's time to start actually getting into your language!! In
the next section I'll tell you why and how you can speak a language from day one of trying.
Page 15
PART 3: COMMUNICATING FROM DAY ONE
When will I be ready to speak the language?
A lot of what I've discovered that I share with you in this guide is actually “common sense” from
many language learners' perspectives. I've found in talking with other experienced language learners
(check out the interviews with some famous polyglots included with the guide to confirm this) that
some things I talk about a lot, like a good attitude, certain study techniques, etc... are common to
quite a lot of efficient language learners.
However, there are some issues we may disagree on, and one of them is when you should start
speaking. Other people have been successful in language learning by waiting before they speak, but
from what I can tell most of them make progress slower than I would because of this. One of the
interviewees, Moses McCormick, has also been successful in learning by speaking from day one.
The issue comes with the sense of feeling ready. It's logical to think that if you don't have enough
basic vocabulary and at least rudimentary grammar and a tiny understanding of responses then you
are simply not ready yet to speak the language.
Well, yeah... but then when you have all of this there is still some fine-tuning to get rid of your
grammar mistakes and learn expressions, slang, and improving your accent. So should you wait
until you have these until you are ready?
Perhaps... but then you still don't have an ideal ability to write formally and use precisely the right
words, and there are cultural references like TV shows and music that you won't be familiar with
yet.
Can you see where I'm going here? With the right amount of logic you will never be ready to
speak. The sad thing is, quite a lot of people I meet are in this frame of mind. I can honestly tell you
that I have come across people with a vastly deeper understanding of how a particular language
works than I would have, and yet I speak more and speak better than they do.
The sense of perfectionism that I've mentioned before does nothing to help because you can never
reach it. You will never be one hundred percent ready to speak a language.
When I ask these other learners when exactly they are ready, I get unsatisfactory, vague responses
like “you'll know it when it comes” and I think this encourages people to wait even longer.
So, in case you can't tell, I think you are ready to speak the language FROM DAY ONE. This has
been why I have been able to speak languages quicker - because I start speaking them earlier.
The way I see it, this is nothing more than pure mathematics. If you speak more, then even in the
same time-frame you'll improve your conversation skills more than others would simply because
you are practising more.
One criticism of this is “fossilisation” of mistakes. Since you will obviously be making many
mistakes, there is a worry that you will simply never unlearn them and speak that way forever. I
think this is a gross simplification of how intelligent people are.
It is indeed harder to get used to saying certain parts of a language differently if you are used to
saying them a particular way – and this is the main advantage of waiting to speak that I see, since
you will get used to saying them correctly from the first time that you say them.
Despite this, being harder to get rid of these mistakes more than compensates for the speed at which
you will actually be able to communicate.
Page 16
SUMMARY: Get rid of this concept of “ready” and start speaking immediately.
A LANGUAGE IS MORE THAN INPUT AND OUPUT
It's very important to realise that communication is the whole point of speaking a language! Not
impressing people with how well you've memorised your table of conjugations, or using precisely
the right word when another one will convey the same message just as well, or even thinking that
being exposed to enough over a long enough time will mean that you can speak it. If you want to be
able to speak a language then you have to focus on the reason the language exists in the first place.
It exists for communication.
So this begs the question of how you can speak if you don't know anything?
There is this idea of being able to reduce any complex system into inputs and outputs – I did it all
the time as an engineer for illustrative purposes to represent electronic devices.
I'm surprised to see that people do this for humans who are learning languages, and they seem to
represent the whole process as follows, which to me is a ridiculous simplification of reality:
1. Take one human who has zero ability to communicate in the foreign language.
2. Add input to that human in the form of vocabulary and grammar, or lots of passive exposure
from the foreign language, to prepare them.
3. Repeat step 2 for a very long time (years or decades).
4. 'One day' said human will be able to speak at a satisfactory level.
It's very tempting to believe this, as it is a more common sense way of looking at learning a
language for a lot of people. You simply cannot say something if you have never heard it before.
You need input to be able to produce output. You can't speak so soon after starting because there is
so much you have not learned yet.
Page 17
Following this logic, if someone were to speak a language in their first week they are simply a
genius or have some magic formula for getting all the vocabulary and grammar they need at
unrealistic speeds.
I don't have this magic formula and I'm not a genius. I can assure you that after my first week, I am
still missing out on a HUGE amount of the core of what it takes to speak a language well. And yet, I
have been successful in communicating almost entirely in that language several times.
That's because I don't see the system as it is represented above. I am not a box waiting for input to
come into me so I can produce the output. I am not simply “human with no language X”, and
neither are you.
You already have a head start. It is impossible to truly start learning any language “from zero”.
Sometimes, the reasons you can communicate quicker are very obvious. English speakers have a
large number of words they'll recognise in many languages (that I will explain more in the last part
of the guide) and there are similarities between many other languages.
It was easier for me to speak Italian my first week in Italy because I had already learned Spanish,
which is quite similar. It was easier for me to start speaking German because I had learned some in
school.
However, there have been other times when I have had no familiarity with the language and yet was
still been able to communicate a lot in the initial stages.
For example, in my first week in Prague I managed to do most of what I needed in Czech, with no
previous studies. After a few weeks of lazy studies of Thai, the one weekend that I actually tried to
speak it was not that bad and I managed to do quite a few basic things in the language, even though
I was only trying to speak for a day or two in total. The way I was able to do this stemmed not from
focusing what I didn't know, but (as mentioned in the first section) to focus on what I did know.
Before even starting I have way more “input” already waiting within me than the above description
suggests.
In this section I will give you several ideas to show you that you can indeed communicate quite
effectively in your first week of learning a language!
NON-VERBAL COMMUNICATION
When people say that we should learn languages like babies do, due to the more natural process
involved, I mostly agree with that, and most of this guide promotes that kind of process. However,
there is one huge difference between adults and babies – adults already know how to communicate
with others. The vast majority of these means of communication are international and are non-
verbal.
You simply cannot belittle the importance of non-verbal communication methods that you have
learned up to now, in helping to ease the initial stages of speaking a language you are otherwise
unfamiliar with.
One study at UCLA suggests that up to 93 percent of communication to express feelings and
attitudes, for example, is determined by non-verbal cues. More specifically, seven percent is
determined by the words used, 38 percent by voice quality/intonation/volume etc., and 55 percent
by non-verbal communication.
It's hard to be so precise, but about seven percent of communication being from the actual words
you use is impressively small. Of course, that seven percent sometimes conveys the absolutely most
essential body of communication, but I make sure that I'm as “fluent” as possible in the other 93
percent to make sure that I have an edge. This statistic is specific to expressing feelings and
Page 18
attitudes, but a lot of other aspects of communication would follow similar patterns.
This edge is the secret to learning languages much quicker in my opinion. It's looking outside the
box of the path to fluency, and especially the initial ability to speak as being simply acquiring
vocabulary, grammar, and exposure to a language. Sorry to sound so flowery (excuse me while I
hug this tree.... OK, back!) but this edge is the human aspect of languages that is hugely ignored by
most people who view it as an almost robotic “input vs output” issue.
The above does not mean that I mime and dance what I want to say, but it does mean that I can
express what I need to say almost without ever needing to use English, even the first day I attempt
to speak a language. In the next section, I will give several examples to illustrate this.
But first, try to imagine what I might mean by non-verbal communication. The most obvious one is
of course expressing it with your body. Don't know the word for “drink”? Mime yourself drinking a
glass of invisible water/beer. Want to show that you don't like something? Make a grimacing
expression on your face and turn your head away from it in disgust. This one tends to be
international as that is how babies generally react out of instinct.
Yes, I know there are examples of certain signs not being international – up-down nods being
equivalent to shaking your head in the Balkans, thumbs up being inappropriate and equivalent to the
middle finger in others etc... but the vast majority of unspoken communication is common to all
cultures.
I'm sure some people can answer that by giving me a list of further examples, but that is still in the
half-empty mode that I mentioned in the first section. Sure, there are differences, but the vast
majority are the same.
Body language, posture, eye gaze, facial expressions, gestures, touching (shoulders/hands/pat on
back, etc.), changing the tone and volume of the words you are saying – there are a host of ways we
communicate ourselves that are independent of the words we use.
A warm smile to ease the initial awkwardness, a bark mimic to show that you are talking about a
dog, a frown and look of discomfort while pointing at a part of your body to indicate that you are in
pain – you don't need words for any of this.
I'm not saying that these are flexible enough to replace actual verbal communication in any way,
but it's important to note that you are not starting from zero. You are not a box waiting for input.
You are a human being, already able to communicate yourself in many ways, just needing to refine
how you would do it better in that culture/language.
Now it's time to give some examples!
HOW TO COMMUNICATE WITH NATIVES WITH VERY LITTLE
LEARNED
“OK, enough theory!” I hear you cry! It's time to show you what I mean.
Before I've committed anything to memory, I usually have a phrasebook in my pocket for my first
few weeks in a country. This allows me to look up what I want to say and repeat it to myself just
before saying it. (“Which way to...?” “Can I have a .... please”, etc.) I get into more detail on how I
remember these unfamiliar phrases for longer in the Resources section.
This is somewhat outside of input/output, since you are basically just reading aloud what your book
says without necessarily understanding the sentence structure and core words. As long as you read
the suggested phonetics well enough, or have a basic understanding of tones. (for non-European
languages) you can say something somewhat resembling what you wanted to say to the native.
With a detailed enough phrasebook and dictionary (or application on your smartphone) as long as
Page 19
you look it up before you say it, there is a huge amount you can communicate this way, especially if
you accept that you will say it with mistakes, or need to rely on saying single words.
This is, of course, not useful for the long-term, but is one of the key features that allows me to get
into speaking a language immediately. It may be quite artificial, but I am communicating entirely in
the language using this “cheat”. I also look up likely (single word or phrase responses) I will hear
back to make sure that I get the gist of the response. Of course, you can't have conversations this
way, but you can definitely get by, and that is a pretty good place to be on your first day.
On my first day in any country, I can do everything essential that I want to do with a phrasebook
and a reasonably good dictionary to fill in missing words. I won't have complete sentences, but I
can express all basic and crucial information using these books just as a temporary crutch. If you
need to ask a few questions, try to memorise the phrases. (More on that later.)
This example shows that you can, indeed, communicate (even though it's very limited) in the
language with no focused input. Your input goes to output immediately. You can do this to certain
degrees in many languages, especially those closer to your own language.
European languages, which don't present word-distinguishing tone issues, make this extra-simple.
You can ask any question imaginable, armed with only a transcript of how the sentence should be
read aloud (as most phrasebooks tend to have). You won't sound elegant and your accent will be
obvious, but you'll be communicating.
If you aren't going to reach “perfection” after 30 years of studies, then why do you need it on your
first day?
The next examples show the importance of context and extrapolation. Not necessarily unvoiced
forms of communication, but crucial aspects of the mechanisms that go on in your mind behind
communication, independent of “how much” of the language you have learned. Just thinking a little
bit has helped me many times much more than learning tables of nominative/accusative/dative.
cases ever would have.
My first day in Berlin, still struggling to turn my wasted high-school level into something useful, I
wanted to buy a SIM-card for my iPhone. I wanted to make sure 3G Internet was working before I
left the store, so the clerk gave me instructions of how to configure it.
This conversation was way beyond what most people would feel up to, at the level I was at. Surely
what I said above, i.e. basic questions with basic responses, is the best you could hope for?
Of course not! That's still ignoring the basic, adult intelligence that we all have.
He said a lot of words that I simply did not understand and then he got to “... Netzwerk, Mobiles
Datennetzwerk”. Since I was familiar with my iPhone interface, these rang a bell of sounding very
familiar to “...Network, Cellular Data Network”, and I knew that to get to these; I had to press
“Settings, General” first. He would have said these words first, but not understanding them did not
stop me from performing what he was requesting me to do.
The point of this example isn't that “Netzwerk” is similar to Network, but that I extrapolated the
meaning of words that I didn't understand based on the context. Of course, it helps that I know the
iPhone menu, but most things you tend to talk about are things that you are familiar with in some
way. Even if you don't recognise specific vocabulary, the situation itself will point you in the right
direction many times. In this case even understanding just 20 percent of the information can still
lead to you extrapolating 100 percent of the meaning!
These are just brief examples – there are actually thousands more.
Observing body language, for example, has helped me integrate into countries quickly, and in many
places in Europe (where skin colour doesn't happen to give me away) people presume that I'm a
local because of the kinds of clothes I wear, posture I have, expression on my face, volume and tone
of any words I might say, etc... that quite a lot of other expats just never try to focus on and
Page 20
ultimately always stand out quite obviously because of it.
Of course, once I start speaking more than a word or two this all changes, but there have been
people I pass by in my building and just say good morning to (somehow pulling off those two
words while not having a very noticeable accent) who have thought for weeks that I was from the
same country as them.
This sense of acting like a local is a form of communication in itself and ultimately encourages that
person to speak to me in their own language, even if I speak way less of it than they would speak
English.
These skills are harder to describe as a whole and come from simply paying more attention to
oblique sources of information rather than focusing entirely on understanding the words themselves.
Instead of me suggesting that you go learn these – you'll be happy to hear that you know them
already! If you talk to someone on a high-noise, low-quality telephone line in your native language
and don't understand segments of a conversation, you can still be very sure of what they are saying.
This is especially the case of “filler” words that add no information such as like, you know, Would
you mind, etc. In fact, a little later, we'll take advantage of these filler words (see Conversation
Connectors). However, if you don't hear or understand these words, you miss no essential
information.
Another situation shows this: have you ever seen a film, or talked to someone in your native
language but in another dialect? There have been times when I have seen American movies or even
an episode of the Simpsons and there have been words or expressions that I simply have not come
across yet.
Did I press pause, and go research that term, and not continue watching until I knew exactly what it
meant? Of course not – most of the time I figured it out from the context. When I first went to
America there were new words and turns of phrase that I had never come across before, but they
appeared sandwiched between so many layers of context that it was really obvious what they meant.
I never formally studied any of these words, but context has taught me enough to have almost no
problems at all speaking with those from another country.
In fact, even as I was growing up I learned most of my English vocabulary from context. There
were occasional games as an infant for learning animal names, etc... but the vast majority of my
native language came to me from just appreciating it in its context rather than being handed a list of
words with their definitions or explanations.
In that case it's easy since I know the language already, but the same principle also applies to
foreign languages.
Here's another example: In many different countries, when shopping in supermarkets and perhaps
hoping just to hear the price of my groceries, I am very frequently asked a question I don't fully
understand before paying.
Supermarkets around the world seem to have club-cards for bulk discounts, and I don't tend to apply
for one. But many times, you are asked anyway if you have this card. This is very common in many
countries. In the early stages, at best I will understand “... you have.... card...” and notice from the
tone (similar in most European languages) that it's a question.
Since the situation usually doesn't require me to have any other card (senior discount based on my
age, not talking about a credit card since I'm paying by cash, etc.) it's pretty safe to extrapolate that
they are talking about the supermarket's club-card. The situation tells me what words are being said
to me, even if I don't understand the words themselves.
So yes, it is quite possible to understand more than you think, and say more than you think, even if
you just started learning the language a few days ago.
Page 21
This makes it possible for me to make one of the most important suggestions of all for those who
are serious about making fast progress: immersion – as early as possible and no matter where you
are, and I talk about this in the next section.
Summary: Communication relies on many things: body language, tone and volume of voice,
extrapolation, saying words/expressions that you may not even entirely understand and context.
These non-verbal modes of communication can help you speak the language with natives even if
you have learned very little of it.
AT-HOME / IN-COUNTRY IMMERSION
Before I get started on immersion, I have to point out that I'm not necessarily talking about flying to
a country. Devoted immersion is possible (albeit part-time) in your home country. Khatzumoto's
story of learning Japanese to a professional level in just a year and a half before even going to Japan
(see interviews) is one of many examples of this being successful.
I prefer to think of immersion the same way I prefer to think of fluency. The level involved in either
depends precisely on your definition, and it's better to think of both of them based on their water-
based metaphorical equivalents. Fluency is like a flowing river. Not necessarily (in fact, pretty
much never) pure water, and occasionally meandering around the landscape rather than keeping in a
straight precise line. In the same way, speaking fluently does not imply perfection.
Immersion is the same – when you immerse yourself in water you can be totally immersed and
spend nearly all of your day under water (presumably in scuba-diving gear for breathing) or you can
splash into the water, swim around deep inside for a while, and then come up for air. You were still
immersed.
Unfortunately, what many people do (for languages) is dip their toe in the water, decide it's a little
chilly and come back the next day to repeat the same. They feel that very slowly easing themselves
in will get their bodies more used to the water.
It's water, it's not going to hurt you! Just jump in! Dipping your toe in the water is not going to help
you swim, and studying a little bit of grammar every now and then is not going to help you to
actually speak.
To continue the metaphor, going to the country is also simply not enough. I see expats living in
countries for years and still speaking pathetically little of a language. This is like living in an air-
conditioned submarine and thinking that you are getting the same experience as the scuba diver.
Technically you are deep in the water, but you aren't getting the slightest bit wet.
Immersion depends less on your geographical location and a lot more on your level of devotion.
You have to put as much time as is humanly possible into your project. If you don't, you simply are
not devoted enough.
I'm not saying all of your time – if you are not abroad, you have to work/study/etc. (presumably in
your native language), and even if you are in the foreign country, you may have to work at a job
involving your native language. These don't help, but unfortunately are part of the real world
situation for most people.
However, apart from that absolutely necessary time in your mother tongue, you are wasting your
time doing other things in your mother tongue that you could easily do in the foreign language.
Doing as many of these things in your target language as possible is where true immersion comes
in.
Do you watch TV? This is generally a waste of time in your native language. You don't learn
Page 22
anything, and many people (including me) believe that it is a very bad way to spend your free time
when there are so many more productive and fun things you could be doing. There are way better
ways to relax at the end of the hard day.
People who tell me they “don't have time” to learn a language and follow that up by asking me if I
saw the latest episode of soap opera x, or reality show y need a good slap in the face to wake them
up, in my opinion!
However, if you watch TV in your target language it suddenly becomes a useful activity. I
personally wouldn't like to get into watching TV, but if you quite enjoy it then do it in your target
language. You can find dubbed versions of some of your favourite TV shows online in most major
languages. And if you can't, abandon it and get much more immersed by watching shows/movies
made in the language of that country.
Do you like playing video games? Go into the game/device settings and change the presentation
language if you can.
Do you use your computer a lot? Change the entire Operating System interface, as well as the
language of your online accounts like Facebook to be in your target language (more details on this
in the Resources section). Change your phone's default language, tune into an online radio station in
your target language (or standard radio if you are already in the country). Now you are starting to
get immersed!
These are passive activities that you would perhaps do anyway in your mother tongue. All of this
can be done independent of whether you are already in your target language's country or at home.
Next, of course, is conversing in just that language.
SUMMARY: You do not need to travel to be immersed – you can start doing passive activities in
the language to force yourself to try to understand more of it. It will be hard, but jumping in the
deep end is how you learn how to swim!
SPOKEN IMMERSION
I am sure most people reading this have already learned a foreign language at school for several
years, and yet they still don't speak it! There are a lot of reasons why this may be the end result,
such as a weak curriculum, unenthusiastic teachers, too much focus on grammar, bored student,
etc... but even with the best teacher and best course, the dedication involved in participating in most
academic approaches is a far cry from what is actually needed.
Academic courses prepare you well for examinations based on what they want to test you on, but
this is still nothing like how you would actually use the language in your first weeks in a country.
Even knowing the most advanced grammar points, people still fail to have basic conversations.
The only way to learn to speak quickly is to start conversing immediately. Sorry, but there are no
clever workarounds if you are serious about doing it quickly. To learn to speak you have to speak.
I learned this the hard way in Spain by spending six months trying out courses, weird learning
techniques, studying grammar and vocabulary intensively, watching TV – I tried quite different
things but was still almost completely unable to speak and my level of Spanish was miserable
despite all of this work. The magic decision that changed everything for me was to try to live with
almost no English at all for one month.
Let me be very clear about this and repeat it, because it is one of the most important decisions you
will ever make on your path to fluency: STOP SPEAKING YOUR NATIVE LANGUAGE!
The reason so many people don't end up speaking their target language is because they don't need
to. They really don't. Learning a bit of vocabulary every now and then and doing exercises in a
Page 23
book helps them learn a language they'd like to speak. Lots of people would like to speak a
language, and they simply never do.
When you force yourself into an immersion environment, this sure-I'd-like-to-why-not laziness
changes immediately to I NEED TO speak that language! You really need to because you actually
need to learn quicker to be able to speak it. This change in motivation changes your speed
dramatically. The best way to do this is to jump in the deep end.
I have suggested this on my blog and quite a few readers have tried this one month experiment and
have learned a huge amount from it. Apart from essentials like work and talking to your children
etc. you can attempt spoken immersion. The key word of that last sentence is essentials. Spending
three nights a week in the pub with your mates, for example, is not essential – you would reduce or
eliminate such activities if you were actually serious about learning your language. The difference
in those successful in learning languages quickly and those who don't are largely influenced by how
the former are way more restrictive in defining “essentials” than the later.
In Spain, I allowed myself to speak English at work because I was an English teacher, and for
weekly calls to my parents. Every other second of my life was through Spanish, even though my
level of the language was extremely low.
If you are in the country already, the opportunities to do this are limitless. Get out of your shell
(more on that below) and meet up with locals and go out with them instead.
If your partner is also learning the language then resolve that you will speak for several hours a day
in that language. For most people, perhaps a dramatic 100 percent change is too abrupt, but with
those interested in joining you in this mission you can certainly start with one or two hours a day
and have earned the “break” to speak your own language afterwards.
With the right attitude, you won't look at speaking your native language as a break – you will be
communicating in your target language, enjoying the chance to focus on the many different
dimensions of communication and appreciating the experience of living through a foreign language.
This attitude keeps people from needing to go back to their native language to “relax”. You will
certainly be using your native language anyway at work, so when you relax and watch TV then
relax in the target language.
The level of commitment will have you simply living through the language (even if it's just for an
hour a day of non-study actual conversation time over the Internet, for example, if you are not
abroad yet; more on that in the links later) and not thinking of your language as a means of relaxing.
It is taking time away from your mission. You have to look at it more aggressively.
Speaking the language as much as possible, or all the time ideally, is what will ultimately bring you
to fluency quickest. I really cannot emphasise this enough. The decision to stop speaking English is
what changed me from a typical frustrated learner with “no talents” in languages into the polyglot I
am today. It is one of the most crucial and influential decisions I have made in the entire last decade
of my life.
If you have a good flow of a language, and suddenly come to a word you don't know, what I always
do with natives is try explain around the word using other words that I already know. Can't say
glasses? Say “eye-windows” and mime glasses with your hands. Can't say giraffe? Say long-neck-
animal-from-Africa. With a bit of imagination and essential vocabulary you can express yourself in
many ways even if you don't know specific words.
You can live your life without needing your native language. This realisation for me started the
snowball effect of making a mountain of progress compared to the six months of kind-of trying.
Reading it here is fine, but the only way you'll truly appreciate this is to immerse yourself by
speaking now. Don't even say you are trying to speak, you are simply speaking the target language.
The quality of what you are saying does not influence this fact.
If you are going abroad soon, make the decision now to avoid English speakers (or speakers of your
Page 24
native language). Yes, “avoid”! You may consider this antisocial, but it's way more antisocial to
maintain a bubble to protect you from speaking with the vast majority of people surrounding you.
Making local friends, or at least friends with other foreigners like yourself who are also learning the
language and willing to practise with you too, is the best way to start.
To find more ways that you can immerse yourself, either at home or already abroad, complete the
two page Worksheet number 3.
GETTING INTO THE FLOW OF SPEAKING IMMEDIATELY
Despite what I've just said, there is one type of other non-native that you absolutely do not need to
avoid, and who can actually be extremely helpful, sometimes more so than natives: other passionate
non-native learners of the language.
You can learn a lot from other learners, so don't think that not having natives around you right now
means you can't get some spoken immersion. This actually takes a little of the pressure off and
allows you both to help each other using only other learners is not so useful as you won't get used to
the actual language as it is truly spoken itself, but for practising with in the early stages, learners can
help one another quite a lot!
You are going to be making mistakes based on your native language anyway, using sentence
structures from your native language, the wrong preposition (because your native language does it),
etc. This is something that you have to go through, and as I keep saying you can't start at perfection.
So, since you are making these mistakes influenced by your native language anyway, why not take
it a wee bit further for the purposes of maintaining your flow in the language?
One “cheat” that I like to use when talking with other learners (or very occasionally, and ideally
never with actual natives) is to speak a hybrid language of what I'm learning and my native one.
Purists hate this idea, but I do whatever it takes to get into the flow of a language. This can be
especially helpful between couples, family members and friends who want to practise the language
with each other, but are worried about not being able to say the right word because they haven't
learned it yet. You can speak the hybrid language with one another – not great for speaking your
target language perfectly, or practically with natives, but it will give you that needed flow you need
to get over this first speaking barrier that most people never do.
Rather than imagining your target language and your native language as two polar opposites,
imagine a scale, with pure-native-level of each language on either side. When you start off, you
might think that you are at the very end of the wrong side of this, but as I've discussed before you
have a head start, so let's say you are at five percent target-language.
Even if all you have is a few words of the target language already, use them. Never say thank you
in Spain to your English-speaking friends, always say gracias. Don't ask your friends if they'd like
to go out for a beer in Prague, invite them out for a pivo. In Germany, don't say you'll see someone
on Friday, but on Freitag. This use of single words is very easy and even the laziest learner should
be familiar with them (especially if already in the country).
This means that even when you absolutely must be with English (or other) speakers, you can use
your target language in these small chunks. This is the first step to getting into the flow and
appreciating these words as being the way you have to express these concepts, rather than being
simple translations of the “right way” of your native language.
This is the 5-10 percent part of the scale.
You can very quickly go on to the next level of actually trying to use foreign language words about
half of the time. For example, in Czech I would ask English speakers “Kde je... the library?”
Page 25
(“Where is”). When in France, if you want to ask your partner if they want to go to the museum, but
all you know how to say are go and museum in that sentence, then use them! Say “Do you want
aller to the musée?”
This way you are using the vocabulary you know, and when you try to phrase questions like this a
few times you will see what you definitely have to work on. (In this example, phrasing questions
and the word want, specifically associated with the you conjugation.)
Since context helps both you and the listener a lot, you can definitely use simpler words to get your
point across when with natives. If I don’t know the word for “translate” for example, but I say that I
“make a document in English from French”, I have entirely gotten my point across – you do not
need to know all the words – imagination to use what you do know can get you very far.
When you say nothing then it seems like the entire language is one big gaping hole that needs to be
filled. But when you actually start to use it, there is quite a lot you can do already, even with just the
basics. You can see what you need to work on and adapt your studies to be more focused on these
issues so that you can add little bits at a time.
This would be the 10-50 percent part of the scale.
Finally, you will have the core of the structure you need to speak and only be missing specific
words. As I said above, with natives you can work around these words by trying to describe them in
other ways, or using simpler synonyms. Can't say furious yet? Just say very angry. Physicist? Say
scientist.
This is ultimately what you should be aiming for when at this stage and still acquiring more specific
vocabulary that you will definitely want to start using at the next stage.
You can also cheat here and use English (or other) words on occasion, in an almost entirely other
language sentence, but try to do this very rarely since you should now already be at the stage of
being able to express yourself much better entirely in the target language, and you do not want to
presume natives will understand that foreign word.
This means that you can jump from the previous 50 percent hybrid to 100 percent in the foreign
language very quickly. It's not 100 percent perfect, but you can make the transition on this scale to
100 percent speaking in that language smoothly rather than abruptly if you like. You will still have
some work to do in perfecting it, acquiring more specific vocabulary and improving your flow, but
you will be speaking entirely in the language!
As I said, people do this anyway out of laziness, but I accept this as one way for me to get used to
speaking the language and make sure that it is only temporary. Speaking like this in itself is not
useful in real situations with natives, but it is a useful stepping stone. Rather than say I'm actually
speaking the language, I affectionately call this hybrid by its hybrid name. Between Spanish and
English you have Spanglish, French and English: Franglais. Portuguese and Spanish: Portuñol, etc.
People can't criticise you for speaking Deutsch (German) badly, when you are actually speaking
“perfect” Denglisch!
This approach is great for people who are living with others from their home country, who are also
interested in learning that language. If they aren't interested, convince them. Time spent speaking
only in your own language is time wasted as far as your mission is concerned.
SUMMARY: Rather than abruptly starting to speak a language, you can ease yourself in by first
throwing in a few words that you know, then using the foreign language structure with some of
your native language, and eventually making this a majority of the target language. This may be
“imperfect”, but it will get you into the flow you need to be familiar with a language.
Page 26
NECESSARY FRUSTRATION
Now, I'm not going to lie to you. Going through several hours a day of trying hard to speak a
language you are barely familiar with can be stressful and very frustrating.
Yes, this means you will have to make sacrifices – seeing your fellow countrymen less, feeling
frustrated with your low level many times and annoyed that you can't say things exactly the right
way, and even feeling lonely sometimes due to the fact that you temporarily cannot express yourself
fully or relate to people fully as an adult normally would. You will go beyond these stages, but
unfortunately you have to go through this frustration to be able to make it to the other side. It's part
of the journey.
But you can make these things less likely to happen by not going through the journey by yourself.
Write about it on your language log, practise with other learners and share your frustration with
them in the language itself. Seeing how others are struggling too, will remind you that it's not you,
it's just a natural part of the process.
Nearly everyone will feel this frustration, but you can make it a lot easier on yourself by
maintaining a positive attitude and enjoying yourself, and noticing your progress. You can pass
through this stage quickly as long as you keep at it.
Being barely committed would mean that you may indeed stay permanently in this frustrating stage
and gain little pleasure in communicating in the language. This is the stage that most learners end
up in who learn language in schools etc.
However, full-time commitment would lead to you passing through the worst of this stage in a short
manner of weeks. For half-time commitment, perhaps in just a couple of months you would pass
through the worst of it and feel more comfortable speaking (even though you'll still have lots of
mistakes and more work to do). Perfection won't happen, but a level of comfort and familiarity with
the language can be reached very quickly. Reaching this stage by going through a short spell of
frustration is totally worth it for a lifetime of opportunities to live your life through that language.
Keep in mind that this frustration is not because you aren't smart enough, or because the language is
too hard, it is just something that many people have to go through. By doing it more intensively (and
of course applying the right attitude and techniques) you will pass through this stage very quickly.
If you are feeling frustrated with your progress right now, complete Exercise 4 in the worksheet.
HACK FOR GETTING OVER UNFAMILIARITY WITH A FOREIGN
LANGUAGE
A huge aspect of this frustration stems more from the lack of familiarity of speaking a foreign
language. It doesn't matter how “hard” it is – all languages will present this challenge to you – it
seems weird at first not to call a car a car. There is this feeling that they are doing it wrong and you
have to convert yourself to recreating the noise that they make. Even the term foreign language
emphasises how strange it all is.
This conceptual change is a huge part of the challenge, i.e. just getting used to the feeling of a
foreign language coming out of your mouth. When you combine this with the many other
complications like unfamiliar vocabulary and complicated grammar, it's no wonder people get so
intimidated by the whole process.
The thing is, once you have learned one foreign language, the second and third ones come much
quicker because you have already accepted in your mind that you can speak a language that is not
your native one. This mentality opens you up so much, and works as a catalyst to allow the
language to flow so much smoother, even if the language you already learned is not the slightest bit
similar to it.
Page 27
I imagine most people reading this are worried about getting control of their first foreign language.
So why am I bringing this up? Well, what if you could very easily make that language that you are
so passionate about your second foreign language? What if you could quickly get over that awkward
feeling of not being used to communicating in a foreign language before you even really started on
your specific target language?
Well there is actually a way! It is an unconventional suggestion, but hear me out: devote two weeks
entirely to ESPERANTO. Esperanto is an artificial language, designed with hopes to become the
international second language, as English currently is. It has interesting uses for meeting people, but
promoting its political and social potential is not something I intend to do here. I'm looking at it
from a purely practical perspective to someone focused on learning a specific other language.
Esperanto is a very easy language to learn and does away with nearly every complication you can
imagine that many languages have. No noun genders, no conjugations, no inconsistent phonetic
rules, easy vocabulary to learn, and it doesn't have difficult pronunciations. This means that when
you learn it, all you basically have to do is get used to speaking a different language.
Studies have shown that studying Esperanto first (six months in certain studies, not necessary in our
case as they would have used the academic approach that some of us aren't a fan of!) and then
studying the priority language for a year and a half, actually gave students a significantly better
command than those who just studied just that language for the same two-year period, even though
they actually studied the target language itself less.
This is because they practically “skipped” the hard part of learning a second language, and their
target language immediately became the third one! They were used to the feeling of a language
already so even though the next one was definitely harder, there was that extra “used to a foreign
language” component that they already got over.
So my suggestion is to use the techniques discussed in this guide to learn to speak Esperanto for
two weeks. You likely won't be speaking fluently after those two weeks, but you'll be able to have
chats with other speakers (in chatrooms and Skype conversations online; there are a lot of people
ready to help) if you apply a good learning and intensive practising approach.
It will be frustrating and weird to speak a foreign language, but you will not have to think so much
(you will recognise a lot of words, and grammar is hugely simplified). Despite this, you will be able
to express anything you can imagine in your native language.
Some of the linked resources I mention later for learning online and finding natives to speak with
can help for Esperanto, but one site that is particularly useful with an interesting course to follow is
http://lernu.net (the course is given in many different languages, and a dictionary is included at the
side of the site). Of course, it's completely free. In your second week, you can start making Skype
calls in Esperanto, and many people in Lernu's chat feature and in forums will be happy to help.
Even if you have no interest in learning a language like Esperanto (I personally find the people at
regularly organised meetings to be well worth learning the language, but I know that many people
don't like the idea of devoting too much time to a language with less history like Esperanto does), if
you devote just two weeks to it and are serious about it, you WILL be able to have those two weeks
will push you months ahead in your target language in terms of confidence and familiarity to speak
a language if you were successful in having chats with people in Esperanto.
After those two weeks you can speak (and write/read/listen to) another language. That's something
to be proud of! Then focus on your target language, safe in the knowledge and familiarity that you
can speak a foreign language – this removes a huge aspect of the difficulty in speaking any
language.
SUMMARY:
One of the hardest aspects of learning any language is pure unfamiliarity with trying to
communicate in a language that is not your own. This is a huge part of the work, so why not get it
Page 28
out of the way by learning to speak a really easy language first? Then your target language can
become your second foreign language.
IT'S IMPORTANT TO MAKE MISTAKES!
Following the advice I give in this guide you will undoubtedly make a lot of mistakes when you
first start speaking a language. I'm certainly not offering a way to avoid these by trying to “absorb”
a language in advance before trying to use it, as many courses suggest. (I'm sure there are examples
of this working, but results come about too slowly). By suggesting that you speak in the early
stages, I'm actually opening you up to the possibility of making a huge amount of mistakes.
This is a necessary part of the process if you wish to make fast progress. You simply cannot avoid
making mistakes!
So, to make sure you maintain a positive attitude and keep up your momentum, you have to change
your attitude towards mistakes. Rather than mistakes being the walls holding you back from
speaking, they are simply bends in the road you must follow if you want to continue on your path.
The only way to make no mistakes is to not speak at all. Quite a lot of people try this approach! I'm
sure they can feel proud of having never made a single mistake in the foreign language... pity about
the minor detail of never trying and having no ability to converse other than perhaps as an outside
observer at best.
So, I suggest you try to actually to embrace making mistakes! The more mistakes you make, the
more you are actually speaking, and more importantly, communicating - and the closer you are to
your objective of speaking well.
Every language learner before you has made mistakes. No matter who they are. If I cared to count
them, I would have made tens (or even hundreds) of thousands of mistakes in speaking languages
over the last seven years. If I only make a single mistake in a foreign language in one day, then I
have not spoken enough.
I take the counter-intuitive approach of actually trying to make as many mistakes as possible! Of
course, never intentionally, and always attempting to be aware of these. The mistake can be a very
useful tool for showing you what you need to work on, but if you spit it out with no consideration of
how you could say it better next time, then you may end up speaking this hybrid language
permanently.
Mistakes in vocabulary can be reduced by learning more words through exposure and study
(examples of how mentioned in a later section), but mistakes in grammar may be fossilised if you
are too lazy to drill them out of you once you have reached a more comfortable level of fluency.
Getting corrections at this stage can be very helpful – I explain below how I convince natives to
listen to and help me. However, getting too many corrections in the early stages is not so helpful
beyond serious mistakes. In the first stages you need to get into the flow of speaking, even if you
are speaking incorrectly.
The thing to remember about grammar mistakes is that a lot of grammar rule differences are only
really helpful for tidying up the language and speaking it correctly. If you use the wrong definite
article gender, adjective ending, or sentence order, it may sound strange; but as long as you speak
clearly and confidently, the other person will understand you. Communication should always be the
most important goal.
SUMMARY:
Mistakes are a necessary part of learning a language. Don’t worry about making them – if you make
no mistakes then you are making no progress!
Page 29
STUDY TRIAGE
There are certain grammar points and key words of vocabulary that really need to be learned as they
help convey essential information and avoid ambiguity, but this depends on the particular language
and if you try to speak a lot you will quickly discover specifically what is causing problems for
basic communication and you will know to study these points immediately.
I like to compare this priority level of study to the triage system applied in a hospital. Hundreds of
people go into a hospital to be cured of various ailments, but the ones seen to first are the people
who are in immediate danger of dying. Those in slight pain are put at the bottom of the list. The
reason for this prioritisation is obvious.
The same needs to be applied to language learning priority. Some good courses work with this
approach and teach you essential basic phrases first and only sprinkle grammar in there
occasionally. If you find such a course, then it can be very useful (rather than use particular books, I
usually just see what is available in my local library, or nearest bookshop – I've found advantages in
different courses and wouldn't recommend one in particular myself).
Although much harder, you can do this to a certain degree by yourself (it gets easier with time, and
especially if you take on a few languages; this is why I learn almost entirely independently now).
Ideally, you would follow some kind of structured course (online, book-based or even some
classroom type courses), but feel flexible to skip ahead to something that would help you right now.
There is no need to read most courses from start to end.
The examples given above show what I mean. When you start speaking immediately, you will
notice immediately what you must learn to be able to actually express yourself and understand
basically. In most pre-made grammar books, courses, and vocabulary lists, this means you can skip
ahead. Understanding everything is not necessary.
When learning vocabulary, for example, if I come across the equivalent word for shoelace I will
almost certainly ignore it before reaching intermediate level. Learning such a word that I am
unlikely to say is not going to be immediately beneficial for me. Studying it for the time when I
maybe might just need it, must go way down in the study triage.
Becoming a good filter for such study points and knowing when to skip something and come back
to it later is essential in being able to learn what will actually help you speak now.
Although I've already defined what fluency (generally) means to me, there are other levels of having
fluency or flow even in your basic conversations, and when coming across something you may not
need to use so frequently you have to learn to simply ignore it. It will only slow you down right
now.
This is, once again, an issue with not aiming for perfection. Accepting that you can't know
everything in the early stages will ultimately catapult you into faster strides of progress.
As long as you focus on the essentials, you will have enough to convey what you need to say in
initial stages. Learn common courtesies like please and thank you, question words, greetings, basic
things you need to ask for (bathroom, hotel, food), basic action verbs (walk, come, go, bring, can,
eat, etc.) and anything else you tend to say frequently. Don't know what you need? The best way to
find out is to try to have a conversation! Over the Internet or with a native – no matter how weak
you are, try it out and you'll immediately see the words you need to learn now.
This idea can also be applied to correction. Getting feedback from natives or advanced learners /
teachers is vital to make sure you are going in the direction of speaking really well. However, in the
very early stages I don't request so much non-critical correction, since the target in the early stage is
more focused on achieving a flow in the language and not a conversation with zero mistakes.
Page 30
Once you reach intermediate stage, you need to convince as many people as possible to help you so
you avoid maintaining a plateau of acceptable in the language. The strategy needs to be dynamic
with your learning level. The way you learn in your first week and the way you do it should be
completely different to how you do it several months in.
SUMMARY:
Skip through any grammar or vocabulary that is not essential for communication at your current
level and learn what you need to speak without hesitating too much.
GETTING OVER THE PLATEAU
With the right approach, learning strategy, and attitude, you will make progress very quickly in the
language. In the early stages, as long as you are motivated you will keep up really good progress!
However, keeping this momentum up over the long term is going to be hard! Sometimes we can
lose sight of the end goal and our level of enthusiasm can drop – if this happens, you will have
reached a plateau.
The question is - do you stay here, or do you charge on to try to bring your progress back on track?
Depending on your learning style and personality, your current approach may need some tweaking
if something is holding you back from reaching the next level. Too many people reach an OK level,
where they can get by and basically stop here and never improve on their level. Even those who
speak fluently, but who would like to reduce their accent or improve their proficiency level, will
never do so if the way they are going about trying doesn't work for them.
In this case you need to debug the system.
Thomas A. Edison was interviewed by a newspaper after 800 unsuccessful tries to make a working
light bulb. “How does it feel to have failed 800 times?” the reporter asked. And Edison’s answer?
“I haven’t failed 800 times. I haven’t failed once. What I have done, is I have succeeded in proving
that those 800 ways won’t work. Once I eliminate all the ways that won’t work, I will find the one
way that will.”
Several years later, after thousands more “successful proofs” he managed to find a way that works,
and thus illuminated the world.
This is the approach that you have to take with your language-learning project. This guide points
you in the right direction, but ultimately you will discover other tools and concepts that will help
you personally even better. If what you are using now is not working, then maybe it's time to try a
new approach? You aren't giving up on the project, but you might have to admit that this method
simply is not doing the trick for you.
Thanks to my engineering and IT background, I tend to look at certain problems as being similar to
a computer program (read: solving problems can be similar, not the human beings with the
problems!). When there was a bug in the code preventing the entire application from running
properly I would find it, eliminate it, and try something different for that aspect of it. This approach
has been very effective in language learning, too.
Any serious project can be looked at as a series of steps that take you to your final goal (be that
short term or long term), and if you reach a brick wall then try something slightly different and you
will get around it. Many of life's problems can be looked at in this analytical way, and language
learning is certainly one of them.
So if you have tried a particular approach to the level of satisfying you that it definitely doesn't
work for you, sometimes the approach, rather than you yourself, really is the problem and it's time
Page 31
to try something new to see if that works better.
This entire guide is based on my own years of trying several different approaches and eliminating
those that simply did not get me to my target in the preferred time period.
In the next section, I'll share some of the most important discoveries that I've made for being able to
actually speak with natives. You should seriously consider trying as many of these as possible, and
then if you see one doesn't work – try something else! My own advice is not the perfect learning
approach for everyone on the planet, however the approach of finding the best approach is a
strategy in itself, and that can be useful for everyone.
SUMMARY:
To get over your plateau of not making any progress, you need to step back and see if there are any
aspects of your approach that can be improved. You can find the ideal way for you!
Page 32
PART 4: SPEAKING WITH NATIVES
JUST ASK
One of the main criticisms I have heard of my suggestions to start speaking immediately, apart from
the speaker's inability to say anything, is the suggestion of people's impatience to listen to you.
This is a huge oversimplification of how people will treat you. In almost every culture, the people I
have met and shown genuine interest in learning their language have been extremely helpful and
patient with me. Even in northern Europe, where people's level of English is considerably higher
and I was warned that they would “force” me to speak English, I have found that if you are
convincing enough they will help you.
To see how to find natives to speak with, even if you can't travel right now, check out the tips in the
Resources section. But once you find them, even if you are still stumbling through the basics you
can still convince them to help!
Knowing how to do this is important both in your home country and abroad – when abroad it can be
surprisingly hard to practise the language if the learner has the wrong approach. As I keep saying, I
have met hundreds of expats living abroad for years who don't speak the local language. This is due
in part to inefficient learning methods, but also due in large part to their own confidence in not
feeling “worthy” enough to talk with a native yet.
And in certain locations, the locals may not be as helpful as in others. If your native language is
English, a lot of people will be very friendly with you simply because of this. Getting “free”
English practice when it would otherwise cost so much means that, unfortunately, a lot of English-
speaking expats end up getting used by locals and will have plenty of friends, but learn almost
nothing of the language. The best way to avoid this is to prevent it from happening from the
beginning.
So, how do you convince them to actually speak with you?
Just ask.
Yep, it's that easy.
Sometimes people might speak to you in your native language simply because they might think they
are doing you a favour, or presuming that you can't speak any of their language, or because they are
in your home country and your language is the default language. If you just say “Could we speak
your language? I'd really like to practise!” (and say it in the actual language, of course!) most of
the time they will be very happy to oblige! This works for me practically all of the time.
Even though the answer will usually be yes, if you make the situation too uncomfortable they may
want to change to another language (if they speak it). Making it uncomfortable actually depends a
lot less on your level of grammar/vocabulary and a lot more on your personality and behaviour. If
you apply the right approach, they will want to listen to you, even if you speak poorly.
Even if your level is OK, it's not that interesting to hear someone talk about themselves in a
stumbling fashion (my name is, I am from, I work as a, etc.). This won't keep the interest of the
person listening to you, not necessarily because of how you are saying it but because it's boring for
many people to listen to someone give an emotionless biography.
In fact, this is another worry people have for simply not wanting to try to speak the foreign
language – they think that they'd have “nothing interesting to say”. I can assure you that I do not
spend my first weeks of trying to speak a language talking about the weather...
So, rather than spend too much time learning basic phrases of how to say who you are and what you
do, after getting through this quickly I start with the story of why I am learning the language, and I
Page 33
do it passionately. As well as this I use conversational connectors (as described below) to make sure
that the other person can keep up their end of a conversation with me, even if I feel I can't say so
much myself yet. Everyone loves a good listener!
SUMMARY:
To convince someone to speak their language with you, just ask!
THE HUMAN ASPECT
The differences are crucial here. Most people who think that it's impossible to communicate in a
language in the early stages are simply not looking at it from the social perspective. They see the
other person listening to you as a test (perhaps similar to the faceless examinations they would have
received in school), where every mistake you make brings you closer to the minimum limit that you
can pass with.
Human beings are not like this. It's not as much the amount of mistakes you make, as it is how you
make them feel. Don't ignore this human aspect when you are speaking a foreign language!
So, by giving a passionate story of why you would really like to keep the conversation in their
language, you will appeal to this human nature. I tell them about my crazy three-month missions
(for dramatic interest), and I've heard people go straight into mentioning how they are finally
discovering their roots since their grandparents spoke the language, or that it has always been their
dream to be able to converse in that language, or that they don't want to be another typical foreigner
speaker and not learn the language of the country they are living in. These will appeal to the
emotional interest of the listener and get them on your side.
Learning how to briefly share this story to appeal to their human nature is more important than
learning how to say how many brothers/sisters you have, or recite your daily routine or many other
things we tend to learn in most courses. Can I say it again? Don't ignore this human aspect when
you are speaking a foreign language!
To continue from that, let's look at hesitations.
Em... Um... Uh.... - those awkward moments where you are searching for a word that you know you
learned and need to produce it, but you require about five seconds to do so. This will happen to all
of us. A patient listener will endure them, but I have found a way that works excellently for me to
get around this problem, just in case they wouldn't.
The method I use is.........
.....
..... dramatic pauses! Definitely not for everyone (it depends on your personality), but these have
helped me so much in keeping people's attention despite needing a moment to recall how to say
something.
Rather than say “um...”, I may put my hand on the other person's shoulder, look them in the eye (or
stare pensively into the distance), take a deliberate deep breath... and then say the word. Since I
have made such dramatic pauses a natural part of my basic conversations in a foreign language,
during this time I am actually thinking hard about that word I have temporarily forgotten.
Even simple conversations suddenly become all the more intriguing with this addition.
For example, if I need a moment to recall the way to say a key word, I could say “I'm going to
the...” [raise index finger analytically, take a step back, breath in deeply as if you are about to reveal
the secret of life the universe and everything, and look out the window at the quest that awaits you]
“... supermarket! Do you need anything?”
Page 34
If you do this enough times people will start to wonder if you are as loopy as Captain Jack Sparrow,
but they will indeed be quite interested in hearing you continue and even enjoy these dramatic
pauses if you do them right, don't overdo them, or at least mix them up to be different in terms of
body language involved.
I'm not quite suggesting that everyone do this, but I hope you see what I mean. Injecting some
personality into your conversations means that even basic chats can be quite interesting to the other
person. It's not just what you say (your store of vocabulary), but the way you say it (your
personality). This human aspect of basic conversations is ignored in most courses, which tend to
focus too much on the actual information, and are essential aspects of our daily interactions in any
language.
If you have your own ideas of how you could inject your personality into basic conversations, give
them a try! Keep in mind that whatever you say is more interesting to the other person for reasons
beyond conveying facts.
Applying logical social rules to your basic conversations help a huge amount. If you hear the person
shares a common interest, talk about that inasmuch as you are able to, rather than irrelevant phrases
you have learned that you might be able to say better to impress the other person with how much
you have learned. If they are wondering about something you can advise them on, tell them
everything you know about it!
If I suggest that I have a theory that any language can be learned to fluency in three months, then
the other person suddenly becomes all ears, no matter how bad my level of the language I'm
explaining it in is. Hearing something interesting transcends language levels for motivating the
other person to want to listen to you and encourage your progress.
You can also give the other person simple motivations to want to help you and give you feedback –
if you are speaking the language with your partner, promise a kiss for every correction. If you are
going out with some natives, say that whoever corrects you 20 times first gets a free beer on you.
When they do correct you, genuinely thank them for their help and smile and show appreciation
that they are bringing you closer to your goal of speaking well. If their suggestion creates an
awkward silence then they will be much less inclined to help you again in future.
A smile and general attempt to make other people feel more comfortable through positive body
language will bring you much further than speaking perfectly ever could. When the native speaker
hears you struggle, sees you fidget, hesitate awkwardly, and generally look like you are not
enjoying yourself in this aspect of basic communication, then their human nature will be to try to
help spare you from this torture! They will probably speak English (or otherwise) to you (if they
can) because they are nice.
Speak confidently and try to have a confident posture. Many countries may be more expressive with
their bodies than yours and it's important to take this into account. Any awkwardness you may
create is less due to mistakes in your grammar, and more likely due to how uncomfortable you are
projecting yourself to others and making them feel the same way. On the other hand, a positive
attitude is also contagious!
You should aim to always have an upbeat attitude and a warm smile – and to laugh at your own
mistakes if necessary to make the other person more at ease. These “social catalysts” are what make
basic conversations so much more enjoyable and even possible despite having such a low level of
the language.
So, I'll say it a third time to really drill it into you! Don't ignore this human aspect when you are
speaking a foreign language! :)
SUMMARY:
Conveying your personality will convince the other person to want to speak to you much more than
Page 35
impressing them with perfect grammar and many words of vocabulary ever will. Even your
hesitations to speak can be made more interesting if you inject some personality into them!
TOO SHY TO SPEAK
No matter what language you are learning, and even with all the best intentions and strategies, one
major obstacle may be holding you back from even trying to use it in the first place – not being
confident enough, or feeling too shy.
One reason I feel that a lot of online and CD-based courses for language learning are so popular is
because they are immune to this issue. Even if you are shy, if you are locked in your room or
listening to your iPod, you are definitely not leaving your comfort zone, so most people would
prefer to learn that way.
Many learners can make successful progress this way, although it is slower than it could be.
However, even if you wait and spend years learning, when the time comes to actually use your
language, you will have to learn to get over this insecurity no matter how much you have learned.
Meeting new people and communicating with them is ultimately the whole point of learning another
language (unless your focus is on literature/movies etc.), and if you aren't ready for this, even
having the potential to speak the language “perfectly” means nothing if you are too timid to even
open your mouth.
This is another bend in the language-learning road that needs to be circumnavigated to get to the
other side if you intend to have confident command over a foreign language. One criticism I have
for courses focused entirely on self-study and no practice (as useful as they are) is that they almost
seem to embrace people's shyness.
It's time to be frank – if you feel you are shy, you are doing nothing more than satisfying a self-
fulfilling prophecy. I'm not going to sugar-coat this one: get over it!
I find it hard to believe that people are born introverts or extroverts. There is perhaps some evidence
to suggest that genetics contributes to this, but it is definitely not a life sentence. Some people
might have to work harder than others to obtain the ability to mingle easier, but it is a skill that can
be learned like any other. You can learn to cook, you can learn a language, and you can learn to be
less shy.
This was certainly true in my own case – as a young nerdy engineering student graduate, when I
started travelling it was quite difficult to make new friends because of this “fact” I would tell myself
of me being too shy to approach people. As I said above, it was a self-fulfilling prophecy. I wouldn't
approach anyone or be confident in using my languages because I told myself that I couldn't. There
was nothing in the world actually stopping me from trying. The barrier standing in my way was one
that I created for myself.
A blind man can't just will his way into being able to see, but shyness exists mostly because you tell
yourself it does. You can get over it!
Reading inspirational books and blogs can always help with this, and I encourage you to do your
own research to learn how to feel more confident with yourself. Going into detail into the
psychology behind shyness is outside of the scope of this guide, but what you need to do is actually
not that complicated.
There is no need to prepare yourself, feel ready, find the right moment, think of exactly what you
are going to say, etc. Thinking too much is what keeps many shy people to themselves. In the same
way as not being able to speak a language perfectly in the exact sense of the word, you can't be a
“perfect” extrovert with exactly the right situation awaiting you. You just need to dive in, walk up
to the natives, and start speaking.
Page 36
This is a skill I have been forced to pick up over recent years, because as a single traveller if I want
to make friends I need to go up to them and introduce myself. This has spilled over into my
language learning technique and when I see a native, I simply go up to them and say
hola/ciao/salut, etc.
Doing this with someone walking past you in the street would indeed be very strange, but talking to
“strangers” in most other situations is not actually that imposing. At parties, people expect you to be
social, when making a purchase, or in a restaurant when ordering food, you are talking to the person
anyway, so just throw in an extra pleasantry in their language. If it isn't peak hour, they'll usually be
happy to have a quick chit chat (depending on the culture). In many social events, most people have
no reason whatsoever to not want to talk with you, especially if your body language and general
behaviour is friendly.
When in social events, as well as applying the techniques outlined above, I make sure what I'm
talking about is slightly more interesting by skipping through basic introductions quickly and
starting a conversation in the middle. Once again, this takes some getting used to with strangers, but
it has been very effective when I want to keep the attention of someone I have just met.
If I walked up to someone in a social event and said “Hello, my name is Benny. I'm a translator
from Ireland. I like to travel and learn languages. What's your name and what do you do?”, sure,
this sounds like a typical pleasant conversation, and it's certainly easier to prepare for this script in
advance – these kinds of conversations are certainly fine for the very first attempt(s).
However, to really get someone interested, I like to start a conversation from the middle. Depending
on the situation, you can do this in many ways. When at a party, I walk up to a stranger, clink their
drink, say cheers (even though I usually just have juice or a cola) and ask them if they like the
music. If you or your neighbour are new to a building/street, say hello as you pass them and tell
them they are more than welcome to pop by for tea/a drink/lunch whenever they want. This works
wonders, and after some pleasant small talk, the other person is generally way more interested to
hear you properly introduce yourself.
The number of examples are limitless, and it really does just require you to approach the person and
talk. It is difficult at first, since you are indeed outside of your comfort zone, but like a lot of things
in life you get good at it with practise! Before you travel abroad, get used to “social skydiving” of
talking to as many strangers as possible in your home town.
Start immediately and practise regularly with everyone (in foreign languages or your own
language), as learning how to do this will make a huge difference in your confidence to speak the
target language ultimately.
Now, complete Worksheet number 5!
CONVERSATIONAL CONNECTORS
All of this is well and good, but even when you are confident you are still limited by what you have
learned to say. You might imagine that in the early stages you could perhaps ask for specific
information once you've learned those essential phrases, but after you get the answer you might not
have anywhere to go to get into a pleasant conversation.
Conversations are not generally a series of questions from one side and answers entirely on the
other. That's more of an interrogation... but even if you are still getting used to the feeling of
speaking a language and still need to learn the core vocabulary to be able to contribute some more,
there is a way to keep the conversation flowing!
The problem with abrupt endings is that they don't invite the other person to continue very much.
“How is your food? Good.” “How old are you? 27.” The other person may be left with an awkward
Page 37
moment where they have to think of something else to say and even then, expect nothing more than
a single response once again – even if you are charming in your response, as suggested above, this
still doesn't leave the other person with many options.
Even if you are still learning the basics, there is actually a way around this! Conversational
connectors are words or phrases that you add into your conversation that don't necessarily convey
any actual information and can be used flexibly in a large number of situations because of this.
We use these all the time in our native language. In English, terms like to tell the truth, you know,
and even pleasantries like thanks, excuse me, and please are just softeners added to make an
otherwise information-based exchange sound more polite. But these don't contribute to the
information itself, and that's what makes them a very broadly useful “hack” for those of us in the
early language learning stage.
When you listen to the target language, you will hear these terms a lot and many of them will not be
present in your native language. It's important to use these as frequently as possible! This will make
your conversation sound way more natural than the right application of difficult grammar points
can.
And the best part is, you can take advantage of them to “cheat” your way into having a more fluid
conversation, even when you are not ready to contribute so much to it yourself yet.
This concept was explained to me by Anthony, who illustrated as follows:
You are in a restaurant and somebody asks what you think of the meal. From a typical language-
learning experience, a student would often get flustered, find the experience unnerving, say “urm
... good!” and hope they aren’t asked any more uncomfortable questions.
However, if they could use conversational connectors, they could say things like:
Thanks for asking. To tell the truth, I must say that the food is good. Let me ask you the same
question: What do you think of your food?
The same conversational connectors can be recombined in all sorts of ways. Later on, then, the
question “Where are you from?” could be replied to with: “To tell the truth, I am from England.
Thanks for asking. Let me ask you: where are you from?”
Very little of each conversation is actually about the topic under discussion, but more about
establishing intimacy and keeping the conversation going.
So, rather than abruptly ending the conversation when you give your answer, you are softly
bouncing it back at them and inviting them to continue their end of a conversation.
Included in the guide is an Excel sheet (can also be opened with the Open Office tool, or Google
Documents – both free) with a list of example conversational connectors such as
agreeing/disagreeing (one hundred percent! That is an exaggeration), opening (that is a good
question), general fillers (between you and me, actually), qualifying (as you already know) and
switching (by the way, I have an interesting story about it). Try to find the translation in your target
language of these (some are included in the translations of this guide) and learn them to give you
some extra words to keep a basic conversation flowing!
These are also excellent ways of replacing those moments of “um...” hesitation. If you learn these
phrases well enough they will come without you needing to think too much, and you can use that
extra couple of seconds to give yourself more time to consider what you are saying next.
Task: Open the “Conversational connectors” document included in the guide and try to fill in as
much as you can with phrases in your target language (from the translations included in this guide,
or from dictionaries/advice from natives). Then learn them and start using them as regularly as
possible!
Page 38
TAKING ON SEVERAL LANGUAGES
If your first language-learning project is going well, you may have the long term goal of taking on
more than one. This depends entirely on the individual – most people are quite content with their
specific target language and don't particularly need any more.
As I said before, there is a big difference between would like to and need, and most people simply
don't need to take it any further. If your motivation isn't there beyond bragging rights or something
superficial, you will achieve very little in your next language.
If becoming a polyglot is truly your long term goal then it's important not to get ahead of yourself
and take on several languages at once, especially similar ones, and especially when you have not
mastered a single one yet.
The advice in the previous section regarding gaining the confidence to speak a language first still
apply. Briefly take on Esperanto as suggested, and otherwise stick with your target language until
you are speaking comfortably. If you are not used to conversing in one language, the next one will
present many challenges beyond what it should.
In addition, if you are learning two languages simultaneously, it's easy to confuse whether the
vocabulary you learned goes with one or the other. If you have reached fluency in one language,
then you can take on the next one! Starting the next one earlier than this may lead to you spreading
yourself thin for both languages.
So if you take on more than one, make sure not to forget that first language! Practise it as often as
possible, even when not in the country it is spoken in, using the suggestions given in the next
section.
If you really aren't sure which language to choose next (always a bad idea! There should be an
emotional or personal reason to take on that language), then consider those in the same language
family! These will present less of a learning curve since you may have a considerable amount of
vocabulary and grammar rules already learned from the first time round.
Of course, if you do this then you have further reasons to possibly mix the languages up! This is
why I apply the principles given above to give my multiple language learning tasks another
dimension – the human one!
Rather than seeing a language as based purely on its content, I associate it with the culture that
speaks it and emulate them right down to their body language, posture, and expressions. For
example, when speaking French you may want to say the words further outside your mouth and
shape your lips to accommodate this. However, when speaking Italian you may be more animated
with your upper body while actually speaking it.
These two languages are very similar, but I have managed to separate them in my mind by applying
this principle. I simply cannot see myself saying a French word (e.g. voiture) when speaking Italian!
It just doesn't work – voiture is associated with the language in every aspect. I say the word while
acting as French as I can. When in Italian-mode it's hard to produce this word for me because of the
association and feel of it. With practice this becomes even more obvious – you don't just learn
vocabulary as is, but you learn them in their context and in their more human association with the
very culture itself.
This is yet another reason why I encourage people to develop their language skills while actually
speaking the language. Learning vocabulary in isolation in your room/classroom and never applying
it means it has no human association – so you may indeed remember its translation, but using it at
the right time (even within the same language) is going to be very much harder!
If speaking multiple languages is your end-goal, then you will have to be open to going through the
frustrating stage mentioned before, again. This will always be there. You will get through it quicker
in future times, but it will never go away and this in itself is a new level of frustration. You would
have already gone through the huge amount of work of being able to communicate in a foreign
language, only to be right back at square one of not being able to fully express yourself once again!
Page 39
In general, you will have debugged your learning approach in the first language, and once you have
a way that works well for you, you can take on future languages if you wish to!
Summary: If you would like to learn more than one language, wait until you are confident in your
first foreign language before taking on the next one. To avoid mixing them up, associate the word
with its cultural context and how a native might say it. And don’t forget that the frustrating stage
will always be there no matter what language you take on!
Page 40
PART 5: LEARNING RESOURCES
IMPROVING MEMORY
In this section I'll discuss some learning resources that will help you to improve your level of the
language so you can converse even better!
I've already talked about one of the most important resources at length in the previous section –
other people. But before I get into online or computer-based tools, there is one other tool that can be
used anywhere, with no technology, books, or even other people: your mind!
One issue that almost everyone I've met learning a language has is remembering the words. It seems
like a daunting task to learn tens or hundreds of thousands of words required to speak a language
confidently – especially for people who generally have trouble recalling people's names or where
they left the keys... it's another reason to prefer to leave language learning to the geniuses who have
superhuman memory capacity, right?
No way! As I've said before, calling language learners geniuses is lazy; every aspect of the process
can be broken down and memory capacity is certainly one of them that us mere mortals can
dramatically improve. The reason you might think that you can't do it is simply because what you've
been trying up to now is extremely inefficient and time-consuming.
When you encounter a new word that you need to remember, the most common method to learn this
word is repetition based rote learning. So, for example, you might come across the French word
gare and need to remember that this means 'train station'. What we typically might do is simply
repeat this over and over... and over again in our minds aloud until it finally sinks in. Gare – train
station, gare – train station, gare – train station, gare – train station, gare – train station, gare –
train station – dozens or hundreds of times.
This is a bad idea. You are making no connection whatsoever between the words, only hoping that
this repetition will burn it into your mind. Unfortunately, the best way for this to work is to do it a
lot of times and this requires a lot of time and is mind-numbingly boring. Yet another reason to
dislike learning languages using traditional approaches...
Even after doing it a huge number of times, you are more likely to be able to recognise the word,
but not be able to produce it. This is one reason why many people who have studied a language
academically, say that they can understand it pretty well, especially when reading it. However they
simply cannot remember how to say these words in the language. The learning process is almost
one-way (target language to native language), and this is not useful for conversations.
IMAGE ASSOCIATION
So you need an association! One excellent way is to make sure you see that word in its correct
context, i.e. as it's actually used. This requires a lot of reading/listening, lots of exposure is still
required, and recall still tends to be one way (once again, target language to native language) since
you are reading or listening in the target language and translating it to native language in your mind.
With the right amount of exposure you will soon stop translating altogether and no longer need to
go via your native language, but it's still less useful for producing the language yourself.
So there are two fun techniques I like to apply when I come across new words or phrases. Both of
them help in producing the words – which is way more important than simply recognising the
words. It's unfortunate, but people who learn vocabulary unidirectionally will tend to be quite
Page 41
disappointed when they need to speak and can't remember how to say what they would indeed
recognise.
These techniques are more enjoyable, and after you get used to them they only take a couple of
seconds (or even less) per term to learn. Luckily, any recall technique, even boring repetition
learning, can help the word be burned into memory if you actually use it a couple of times, in the
right context, in a natural conversation. The first few times you will pause a moment (don't forget to
make the pause more interesting than “um...”!) to remember the association, but then the word
comes naturally to you and you can abandon the association entirely. You simply know the word.
So these strategies are actually temporary means to bring you to this instant recall quicker.
The first one, which I have mentioned on the blog, is image association. You have to take the word
you need to remember and make an imaginative association with its translation in your mind. This
should always be as imaginative, colourful, funny and ridiculous as possible. Simply imagining the
two objects basically interacting is not enough because that's easy to forget. The stranger the story,
the better.
I'll give you one of my favourite examples, applied to the French gare mentioned above. Here's the
story I made up:
There is no word in English (at least that I know of) that sounds almost the same as “gar” (with an
“ah”, not “ay” sound) so thinking for a moment, the closest I could come up with was Garfield, a
popular comic strip (and cartoon and even movie) of a fat, lazy, and sarcastic orange cat (that
talks, of course). I also thought of a very specific train station that I used a lot in Valencia, in
Spain. It is important from the very beginning to make everything colourful and full of details and
movement. I imagined the people rushing through the station, under where the timetable can be
found, the platform I usually went to, and the machine I would buy the tickets from. Suddenly, there
is a big fat orange cat, in very cartoony colours; not your typical tabby cat, but Garfield himself
with his trademark sneaky grin.
But he isn’t just sitting in the train station (that would be very easy to forget). He is about to miss
an important train directly to Bologna for a Lasagna-eating competition! He has his suitcases and
sunglasses with him, since he is going on holiday, of course, and he is puffing frantically as he runs
around trying to figure out which platform his train is going to leave from. It’s quite funny that this
fat cat has to actually run for the first time in his life. The train is pulling out of the platform but he
dashes after it, throws his suitcase on the back compartment, pounces on... and makes it just in
time!
With this image, whenever I picture a train station I will always see this ridiculous story of Garfield
running through it and that will help me remember to say “gare”. Conversely, seeing “gare” and
immediately recognising the similarity with Garfield that I assigned it, means that I will see
Garfield in a train station. The recall process takes less than a second and barely slows down a
nicely flowing conversation.
Every association I make like this has plenty of random background information to make the story
even more dramatic and very difficult to forget. If you didn't know it already, I bet if I asked you in
a few weeks time you could tell me what the French for train station was if you genuinely visualised
this story yourself! And of course if you saw or heard gare you could tell me what this means too –
the crucial difference is that this is bidirectional! This important aspect helps a lot in a conversation,
since you'll be able to both understand the other person (as with rote learning and lots of exposure
in the right context) and actually say the words yourself.
I like to do this for as many words as possible, so the main criticism you would logically have is
that it takes too much time and work for a single word, right? When you read through the above
story it took a couple of minutes – so it sounds quite inefficient and even worse than rote learning to
have to go through all of this for single words. Actually, I came up with this story in just a few
Page 42
seconds – five seconds, perhaps. Since your mind works very quickly you can create amazingly
detailed stories very quickly. With practise you can do this almost instantaneously for any new
word you see.
It does take a bit of practice initially – you have to rediscover the talents you had as a child for
being so imaginative. So, at first, it might indeed take a whole minute to create such a story as you
search your mind for clever ways to make it more interesting, and you might need to be quite
focused too. But after doing this several times it will come quicker and quicker and you will be able
to do it on the move, and even in the middle of a conversation.
People always ask me how I can learn so much by pure conversation, rather than locking myself in
my room and studying the language – this is one of the most important ways I do so. I use context
to figure out what a new word means (or simply ask the meaning) when hearing it from a native,
and apply a clever association in that moment. It took a lot of practice to get into that routine, but I'd
describe myself as someone with generally a poor 'natural' memory (I still can't ever find my keys!!
I should start doing some form of image association to remember where they are as I place them
there...) and I still managed it, so I'm confident that you can too!
At the end of the day, just remember that this is a temporary association. I find that after I've needed
to recall a word two or three times, it will just come to me immediately and I know the word – no
translations or associations; I understand the word as meaning what it actually does, and no longer
need to go via English. This certainly helps with maintaining a natural flow in the conversation.
Other example associations I've used (more relevant to native English speakers) include
• Spanish playa = beach. Think of a cheesy flirty player walking up the beach (I thought of
one in Valencia close to where I lived, rather than “a beach” to make the association more
powerful) in his swimming trunks showing off his muscles chatting up all the girls. Playa
and (beach) player.
• Czech prvni = first. Take the word and add vowels to make it pronounceable and more
familiar and in my case I got pro van. I imagined a professional van driver winning first
place in the van Olympics, with a heap of silly details to make it easier to recall.
• Thai greeting / hello, romanised as Sawadee. The first part sounds almost like how a Brit
would pronounce sour, so I imagined a British tourist on Ko Phi Phi island going to a café (I
even picture precisely which café to make more of an impact on my memory) and ordering
tea (almost sounds like dee) as the first thing he would say to any Thai waiter he'd meet. He
would dramatically spit it out on top of the waiter after taking a sip since the milk in it had
gone sour – sour tea = sawadee and since it's the first thing he would ever say, that's hello.
Rudely spitting tea all over a local is such a powerful image that it would come to me very
quickly.
With practice, I have learned to think of an association for any new term I come across, sometimes
by changing the pronunciation slightly or being very imaginative with the association, as seen in the
examples.
This can be learned. Give it a try when you see a new word you'd like to learn! It's an excellent way
of making language learning more fun while still remaining very practical. When you learn to do
this quickly, you can potentially learn thousands of words much quicker.
If you'd like more ideas, there are several suggestions for basic vocabulary in French, German,
Italian, Polish, and Spanish at http://www.memorista.com/ - the associations are even more
powerful when you come up with them yourself, using parts of your own life in the association.
Most of the associations I use would never work with other people, but that doesn't matter – make it
interesting in your own personal way!
Page 43
Give it a try in Worksheet 6!
USING MUSIC TO REMEMBER PHRASES
One drawback to the method above is that it is more ideal for very small sets of words – usually one
or two. After this, when you try to learn entire phrases, it gets more complicated to bring them
together.
I can tell you that one resource I like to use, and recommend to people, to be able to communicate
in the very early (i.e. first day on) stages of speaking a language is a travel phrase book. It's not a
great long term solution, but a good phrase book can be extremely useful to be able to produce full
sentences to express yourself. Another alternative is finding a small group of basic phrases online
and writing them down or importing them to your phone to study.
My personal favourite is the Lonely Planet phrasebook series, due to its wide range of quite useful
basic phrases – unfortunately, it applies a mostly standard template for all languages, but covers
most of what you might need to say, anyway. These kinds of phrasebooks give you entire sentences
to express essential concepts, which you would not get very quickly by studying the language
systematically to understand the underlying grammar.
But how do you learn these phrases? They are strange strings of pronunciations that may not
resemble your native language. Image associations have their potential here – making a chain of
images for each word, for example, but it does get to be too much work at first when you are not too
worried about understanding key words just yet and want to just say the whole phrase.
So, the second technique I use is adding music into phrases that you need to learn. Bear with on this
one! I'm not suggesting you turn your entire day into a Broadway musical. (Although if I ever
figure out how that would be practical to language learning, I will suggest it to people, simply
because the world would be more fun that way!)
Most people would, once again, use repetition to get these phrases into their mind. In this case, I do
it too, but combine it with music and an association. The three different approaches together give
me a very easy to remember sentence, even if it's quite long!
Association is important for the first word/part of the sentence. Even if you don't understand the
word itself, try to make an association with just this first part for the concept you wish to recall. So
for example, to remember that Dove si trova il gabinetto is Italian for “Where is the toilet?” you
can take just the first part Dove (pronounced doh-vay) and think of a duvet (almost pronounced the
same, as doo-vay) being used as a giant's toilet paper, or a toilet made out of bed covers, etc. As far
as the word is concerned this is not very useful, because “dove” actually means where. But to
temporarily remember the entire phrase it's a good start, and if you use it for a few phrases you'll
start to naturally remember this word as meaning where without any associations.
Now that you have the first word to start with so you can snap it out of the air in an instant, it's time
to add some music! I don't mean just speak musically (in this example, as Italians may be more
famous for), I mean sing it. Think of any random tune – for example Big Ben's chime (before the
dongs), or the intro to a song you like, etc. and sing the phrase to this tune.
You can repeat this a few times to help it sink into memory, but it will be way more fun when
repeating it with a tune. As well as this, you have another dimension of a possible association to use
if you are using a specific tune.
If I did go with Big Ben here, for example (of course, this particular tune is used for other bells! But
I personally associate it with Big Ben), with my giant's example, then I'd picture the Big Ben being
Page 44
used sideways (rather than upright) as a the toilet paper holder, with a giant duvet hanging over it.
Since Big Ben is in the association, I'd remember the tune and the words would come so much
easier, especially if I sang the phrase to myself a few times. Sing it with me! ♬ Dove si trova...♫ il
gabinetto ♪. Can you hear it? In my head both the two syllables sets “-ve si” and “etto” are on the
same note so the typical part of the tune fits perfectly with the phrase.
Overall this may take no longer than 20-30 seconds to read the phrase, come up with the
associations, and sing it to yourself a few times. It will take longer at first as you try to get your
mind used to recreating the extent of imagination you would have had as a child, but then it will
come back to you naturally! When you get really quick you can do this in even less time!
Of course, you don't need to actually sing the phrase when the time comes to say it to a native, but
in the time you use to recall it (the “uhm...” period that you will now be replacing with
conversational connectors like “Excuse me” or “Can I ask you a question?” or alternatively using
body language to show that you are about to say something etc.) you will bring up the association
for the first word and tune and sing it out in your mind and then remember the phrase itself to speak
it as normally.
After doing this two or three times you can actually abandon all associations and the entire phrase
will come to you instantly. Music can be a huge help in learning languages – I also try to study song
lyrics and sing along, and the vocabulary in them comes to me much quicker because of this.
MAKING TIME
Another “resource” at your disposal is the huge amount of time that you are not taking advantage
of. Yes, I know that you're really busy – aren't we all! Work, family, friends, hobbies and past-
times, errands to run, shopping, shower, cleaning, sleeping, and any other responsibilities – it's a
wonder we have time for anything!
No matter who you are – the busiest CEO of a company or a student with endless assignments to
complete – there is time that you are wasting that you can take advantage of to improve your
language skills.
The best way to get back huge segments of your day to take advantage of, is to eliminate pointless
activities from your life. I've already suggested that watching TV in your native language is
probably not contributing much to your life projects – what else do you do regularly that simply
does not contribute to your life in any positive way? Think about them and eliminate them from
your daily schedule. If you completed one of the early worksheet exercises about what you do every
day, you might notice something that you don't actually need to do. If you tell yourself you are
“relaxing” then consider if the activity ultimately lets you relax in the long term or if its just a short-
term fix.
When you remove pointless activities from your daily routine, you'll have that extra bit of time for
the important stuff! Next is to look at the things you simply have to do, but are still wasting time:
waiting!
You wait for the bus/metro/train to arrive, you wait in it while going to work/school or home, you
wait in the supermarket queue/line, you wait in a traffic jam in your car, you wait when ordering
coffee in the morning, you wait for your water to boil if you prepare it yourself, you wait for your
friend to arrive, you wait at the doctor's/dentist's, you even wait for ten or so seconds in lifts,
elevators, at traffic lights, when waiting for something to load on your computer, for someone to
answer the door after you knock, etc.
In most of these situations you might actually be alone – so if you can't talk to someone, what do
Page 45
you do? Stare into space? Read advertisements around you? Twiddle your thumbs? Press the
pedestrian cross or lift button in frustration that nothing has happened yet? These little segments of
our day fly by unutilised and actually add up to a huge amount of time wasted. You can't avoid
these situations – they are natural parts of your day.
For most people, these little segments are annoyances – why is the other person so late? Why does
there have to be so many people ahead of me in the supermarket? Why did my computer have to
crash to be rebooted now of all times? Waiting in frustration is simply what we end up doing –
considering how much time per day we spend doing this, this is an unneeded source of stress!
I am actually happy when these occasions arise! Seriously – if someone is arriving a little late, or
they messed up my order at a restaurant and have to prepare the food again, or if I just missed the
bus and the next one won't come for fifteen minutes – rather than cursing at my “bad luck”, and
adding stress to my life by being angry during this time, I think to myself – great! Another chance
to study some vocabulary!
I very rarely sit down at a desk with a highlighter pen “studying” vocabulary in the traditional
sense. I simply “don't have the time” with everything else I need to do during the day. All of my
study is done in these waiting situations, because they tend to add up to a lot of time (especially if
you live in certain countries that are more “flexible” with the concept of punctuality).
This means that all you need to do is make sure your study material is portable. Most of my time in
initial weeks in a country is focused on learning phrases, so I have a small phrasebook in my
pocket. If I am already speaking OK, but I need to focus on grammar (don't do this in early stages!)
then I might have a print-out of conjugations or preposition rules, folded up. In situations where
listening is preferable (such as in your car), then have an audio course, or even better, a podcast, in
the target language.
Some languages also have vocabulary books to study that separate words into categories for
studying, which makes them easier to go through systematically, although in early stages the
dictionary at the back of the phrasebook is small enough to feel a sense of achievement in
completing its essential list of words of a single letter of the alphabet in a single sitting.
You simply swipe out the paper/small book, open it up on the right page and apply the words to
memory or test yourself on them until the waiting time is over. Alternatively, you turn on your MP3
player and listen to the audio. This can amount to hours of study a day considering how much time
the typical person wastes!
This is what I have been doing for most of the last few years and it has been very effective!
However, I have also recently discovered a great improvement to this: Spaced Repetition Software.
SRS is an information presentation method that gives you the information before you would forget
it and makes sure that it stays constantly fresh in your mind. You can install a free version of this on
your computer using the Anki application. One of the interviews included that I conducted was with
Damien Elmes, the developer of this system, who explains how SRS can be useful.
Studying on your computer can be very helpful, but is not the focus of this section – we need to
study on the go! So if you have an iPhone/iPod Touch, Android device or Nintendo DS (for offline
use, i.e. so you don't have to use the Internet to study), or some other mobile device with Internet
access (that is presumably not expensive to use), then you can actually use this device to study on
using the SRS system.
This way you are utilising those two-minute windows that add up quickly, while also taking
advantage of a presentation system that decides what words you need to learn based on how hard
they are and constantly tests you on this. Randomly deciding what words to study yourself in a
phrasebook is fine, but this way you will waste even less time, since you won't see words again that
you definitely know, and will be constantly asked difficult key words that you need to learn.
To use these devices, check out the link above and see how to install them on your device (or access
Page 46
the online interface using an otherwise Internet enabled device), and add “decks” that are publicly
available - or create your own on the online account to study from.
FREE WAYS TO FIND NATIVES WITHOUT TRAVELLING
Of course, I'm back once again to the best resource of all – the natives themselves! If you are in the
country already, you will be surrounded by them and there will be plenty of opportunities to speak!
Just make sure to get out of your shell and talk to as many people as often as possible!
However, what if you can't travel right now? Should you just focus on studying until you are ready
to practise when you travel “some day”? Hardly! There are thousands of FREE ways to speak right
now that you might not have tried yet!
The first one is in-person tandems (language exchanges). If you go to a local university and check
out advertisement boards there, you might find an exchange student looking to improve their grasp
on your language and be able to get in touch with them.
What usually happens, though, is that native speakers in your country will have ample chance to
practise and might already be speaking well enough not to need help in your language. In this case,
you can propose an exchange for something else that you can teach them.
Can you play the piano/guitar? Cook? Code webpages? Practise yoga? Play chess? Whatever your
talent, there are people who want to learn it, especially if you are quite good at it. But even if you
aren't at the professional level, they'll still want to learn from you... all they have to do is promise to
teach you their language for half of the exchange!
If natives are particularly difficult to come across where you live, then you can specify “fluent
speaker” in your search, especially if you are starting off. Don't forget how much fluent (non-
native) speakers can help us in our learning path! Sometimes they can even be more helpful than the
natives themselves.
If you are in a major city then check out the free advertisement sites on Craigslist (look at the list on
the right to see your country/city) or eBay classifieds (click “eBay classifieds group” at the bottom
to see a list of countries if your city isn't on the home page). Usually the place to find / create an
advertisement for a language exchange would be in a category such as services offered --> lessons
& tutoring for example. You can also use the same sites to find paid private lessons for much
cheaper than you would through many language schools.
The second (much more unconventional) approach to finding natives to speak with, when you are
not in their country, that I have used very frequently is couchsurfing. This site is used by (mostly)
young travellers on a budget who would like to stay with locals rather than in hostels or hotels.
It may sound iffy, but the site has an excellent references and vouching system so you can see that
the person is trustworthy. I've hosted over a thousand different couchsurfers from all over the world
and have never had any problems with them.
The advantages to the traveller are obvious, but the host can also get a huge amount out of it! If you
host people that speak your target language (and a few that don't, for the purposes of getting used to
the site and earning your own references) then you will have someone very motivated to help you
(you are giving them free accommodation, after all) and you don't even have to leave your house to
be able to practise! A spare bed, fold-out couch, mattress, or even sometimes just space on the floor;
is all you need to offer in most cases.
Even if the concept of hosting someone is daunting (read through the site before you dismiss that
idea!) you can still use it to meet up with travellers at Couchsurfing's regular meetings in major
cities. Go to the Meetings page, as well as the Group page for your city, and see if there are any
Page 47
taking place soon! You can see from those confirmed to go whether there are natives of the
language you wish to practise travelling through. Of course, you know from this guide how to
convince them to help you!
Another website specifically for that purpose of meet-ups is meetup.com. This one tends to be more
popular in English-speaking countries – in major cities there are very regular meetings to practise
particular languages. These are great places to go to meet those going through the same struggle as
you, and you might even run into a few natives!
You can take this even further and see that on basically any modern social networking website, you
will find meetups that may include particular language-learning themes. For example, in Facebook
if you perform a search for your city name followed by the language name, and then click “Events”
you may see that someone has already set up such a meeting!
Otherwise, if you know of online forums relevant to your city, check them out! If you don't find any
language meetings then it's time to take the initiative and create one yourself! Spread the word and
people will come. You don't even need the Internet – just ask your friends if they know anyone who
speaks your target language and you might just be two handshakes away from a potential language
exchange.
The third way you can practise a language without needing to travel is entirely online. You may not
be meeting up in person, but you can have full video and/or audio conversations that are almost as
good as talking with them in person. Thanks to the Internet, it doesn't matter where you are on the
planet, you can always find natives to speak with!
There are actually too many sites that let you do this!! Some examples include polyglot language
exchange, Chatonic, Babelyou, Sharedtalk, italki, My language exchange, Lenguajero for Spanish,
and vraiment for French.
Quite a lot of people use LiveMocha and Busuu for this too (although I wouldn't recommend the
courses on these sites for learning the language they do have huge communities of people looking
for language exchanges).
These sites usually have paid aspects to them, but that is separate to the basic search feature. If you
find a native willing to help you, all you need to do is exchange Skype details and start chatting
with one another for free outside of the system.
It's certainly awkward to talk to a stranger online at first, but if you make it a regular occurrence
they will become your friend and things will get much easier. Even though it's online, this is another
way of jumping in the deep end and getting used to conversations. Just make sure that they are
helping you as much as you are helping them!
ONLINE RESOURCES
While the focus of this guide is on speaking, it's important not to forget other aspects of a language.
I find the LingQ website to be a great free way to practise reading and finding podcasts to listen to
for several major languages. It is pretty user friendly, but you can find a detailed review of its
advantages (and disadvantages unrelated to the reading system) on my site.
The podcasts aspect of LingQ is a great resource for downloading audio to listen to on the move. If
you can't find what you want here, you can also download podcasts in the target language (not
directed at learners, but at natives) by going to radio stations in that language, searching online or
going into iTunes. Many podcasts are completely free and will be available in themes that will be
more interesting to you (news items, technology updates etc.)
Another resource I like to use is Google Image Search rather than a dictionary. The problem with
Page 48
bilingual dictionaries is that they require you to think via your mother tongue. This will always slow
you down when the ideal situation is to think directly in the language itself. Ideally, you will see an
image of what the word represents (obviously much better for items rather than certain prepositions
and abstract qualities) and associate the word with the image rather than with its translation.
Give this a try! Go to the Google site for your target language (google.es for Spanish, google.fr for
French, etc.), click the option to change to that language (if it is still in your language by default)
and search for your term and then click the “images” link (picture of a camera) on the left. Having
Google search in that language will make sure it provides the correct images.
This is one way that you should try to keep everything in the target language. You will lose your
flow of the language when you keep switching back and forth.
You can also use the basic Google search as a grammar check. To find out if the word is masculine,
feminine (or neuter), what case ending works after a particular preposition, etc... I usually use
Google rather than looking it up.
In this case you would need to use quotation marks “ ” around what you are searching for. If you
want to find out if you need to say commencer faire, commencer ati faire, or commencer de faire in
French, for example, just search for each one. You will usually get some results for the wrong one
(the words may come together in less common ways for example), but in this case you'd get 100
times as much for the ati version.
To see if coche is masculine or feminine, you can use the dictionaries below, or just put “coche
pequeño” and “coche pequeña” (masculine then feminine) into Google and see which one gives a
dramatically higher number of results.
Next – you need to check your spelling! You can use Google's spell checker (Did you mean..?), but
this would be tedious for individual words. Luckily, Firefox (and other browsers) and Open Office
come with excellent foreign language dictionaries that you can install for free and switch between
very easily. Even professional and expensive solutions like MS Office's spell checker can be very
limited in what languages you can apply, so you are actually better off going for the free version.
When writing a letter I use Open Office and add the language option I require (quite a lot of
majority and minority languages included) and get a spell-checker, thesaurus, and hyphenation
check. This will automatically indicate when you have written something incorrectly as you type,
and suggest a replacement. If you keep making the same mistakes you will soon get the idea!
Automatic corrections like this are an excellent way to learn. Firefox also makes it very easy to
install other dictionaries to check your spelling as you write in forms/e-mails, and even inside
facebook chat!
Since I use chat programs a lot to practice my foreign languages, I have installed the chat client
pidgin – it's one program that works with MSN, facebook chat, Skype, AIM, ICQ, Google Chat and
many others; and the best part for me has been the easy-to-change language selection for spell check
to show you instantly if you are typing something wrong.
Sometimes you can't do a Google search so easily to find the answer to your question and you really
need a native to help you out. Luckily, there are sites specifically designed for that purpose! Lang 8
is for submitting short text that you'd like to get corrected by a native. And if you'd like to know
how a sentence is pronounced by a native? Submit it to Rhinospike! Both sites are completely free
(sign up first), and work quicker if you submit your own corrections and recordings to help those
interested in your own language.
To hear just how single words or compound words sound, as pronounced by a native, search for
them on Forvo.
At times the question you need to ask is a technical question about the language. In this case you
should check out the many online active forums that other learners and natives use and can answer
your questions very quickly!
Page 49
One of my favourites are those at wordreference.com for explanations on a wide range of
languages. But if you do a Google search for Language name and forum and have a quick look to
see how active the forums are for giving tips in that language, you can sign up yourself (once again,
usually completely free) and ask and expect to get useful responses quick quickly!
What about online dictionaries? This can largely depend on the language, so it's a good idea to ask
on the forum what dictionaries they recommend for the one you are studying. However, there are
certain multilingual dictionaries that give a very good answer to a broad range of languages!
One is Wikipedia. It isn't just a free encyclopaedia (already an impressive resource), but is an
encyclopaedia in hundreds of languages! A vast amount of articles are actually linked between
these languages, so you can look up the word (either in your native language, or in the target
language's version of Wikipedia) and scroll down a bit and look left and you will see the
translations available! This can be especially handy for many terms not available in other
dictionaries.
Wordreference (linked above) is great not just for its forum but for its vast dictionary. It's free
because of the rather annoying advertising on the side, so I disable this by installing adblock plug-
ins in my browser. This dictionary gives several different translations, suggests the context, and
even conjugates verbs and recognises them within search terms!
If you are looking up more technical vocabulary, then check out the Proz term search results (using
the Kudoz option) or the InterActive Terminology for Europe or MyMemory for
technical/legal/medical or otherwise more professional and very specific terminology.
As suggested before, you should try to change the language of all of your interfaces (telephone,
computer games, computer) to be in the target language. This virtual immersion will be a huge help!
Some particular programs like Skype can be changed in an instant. Changing your web browser's
presentation language is also easy enough (unless it's Internet Explorer, in which case an entirely
new download is required). There are plug-ins to change the language in Firefox quickly and
Google Chrome makes it very easy to change the interface language.
On a Mac, Safari’s display language is linked to the system language settings. For options to change
the entire system's language settings, go to “System Preferences...” and click “International”.
Changing the browser's default language will ultimately change the language of many websites that
are available in those languages (a lot of sites like Google check the browsers language and decide
based on that what language to present to the user). Other sites like Facebook need a manual change
to settings, but this is very easy (Account settings -> Language).
In Windows changing the language of the entire Operating System is a little complicated and
usually requires the user to have the professional version. However, you can install the Ubuntu
operating system and change its presentation language in an instant. Ubuntu is a flavour of Linux
that can be installed on any computer for free and is easy to get used to. You can have it run side-
by-side with Windows, choosing one or the other at boot-up.
Using these techniques of virtual immersion is an important step in the right direction!
Page 50
PARTICULAR LANGUAGE ISSUES
WHY DO THEY HAVE TO HAVE WORD GENDERS?
When you start to learn certain languages that use noun genders, the first question that comes to
mind (at least to English speakers) is why? It seems like pointless extra information to add to a
language.
Why is the moon feminine in Spanish and French, but masculine in German? Why is the word
“masculinity” actually usually feminine? How is it possible for a girl to be neuter in German?
Looking at it this way it is indeed way too confusing! It gets worse when you consider that there is
anywhere up to about a million words in a language, so learning the gender for each of them is a
huge amount of work! If you were to use my association techniques mentioned above for every
single word to remember if it is masculine or feminine (or neuter) it would start to get quite tedious,
indeed!
My teachers always suggested that I learn by repetition by always saying the word with its definite
article (der/die/das in German) until it would sink in. This helps, but is not efficient enough!
Rather than look at as pointless extra work (remember, the wrong attitude will always hold you
back!), it's better to realise that it's not the objects that have a gender, it's the words. This really does
make a huge difference.
A word can easily be masculine or feminine and have nothing to do with actual sexual gender, or
necessarily being “manly” or “girly”. These are just convenient titles for different categories, and
may as well be yin and yang or positive and negative. Other than actually being associated with
people of that gender (like father, sister, girlfriend), these gender associations are rarely ever going
to help.
The reason you can think of this slightly differently is that a word is made up of a group of letters
and its ending can help it go into a particular category. The ending (or the entire word when it is
short) is almost always what is actually influencing what “gender” it is.
The gender of the concepts behind these words are rarely connected (unless the endings themselves
are similar). So you should actually study word endings to see the patterns for gender associations.
Most of the time this will guide you in the right direction and you can get at least 90 percent of the
gender right just by spending a few hours learning the guidelines (usually available in most good
grammar books).
For example, words for machines, and especially concepts (-ness words in English, like happiness,
freedom, etc.) tend to be feminine, not because of the concepts themselves, but because of the word
endings associated with them (-té in French, -dad in Spanish, -keit in German, -ost in Czech,
-ation/ación/azione etc. endings in Romance languages).
Learning these endings is not actually a huge amount of work – there may only a dozen or so
typical ones at most, that will generally cover the vast majority of words, depending on the
language.
If you really don't know the gender, don't let this hold you back from speaking it! Just make a guess,
and there is usually a 33 percent or 50 percent chance of you being right. If you are wrong, I
promise the world won't come to an end! The native speaker will tell of this mistake, or you will
learn it as you improve your skills. The important thing is to say something and to keep the
conversation flowing.
Page 51
INSTANT VOCABULARY
While you can use the image association and musical technique to get some vocabulary and phrases
into memory, there is still quite a lot of work to do.
That's why it's important to know that you already speak some of that language. No matter what
language it is, one of the first things to do is to find out what cognates exist with your mother
tongue.
No matter what the language is - Japanese, Swedish, Tagalog or Portuguese - there are words that
you already know. Each language is not an island – it is influenced by politics, technology, trends,
religion, history and many other things that us humans tend to share internationally.
When you start learning a language, if you look out for these cognates you will start immediately
with hundreds of words, even in distant languages.
For example, in Italian you can turn on your computer, and in (Brazilian) Portuguese you move the
mouse, in Russian you connect to the ИнTернеT (exact transliteration of Internet, И=I, н=n and
р=r, can you read it now?), and in Japanese you check your E メール (second part
transliteration, “me-ru”, their way of approximating the pronunciation of “mail”), the name of the
program you use to surf the net in Turkish is Mozilla Firefox, and you may use “Microsoft
Windows” in the Somali language, or perhaps “Linux” in Euskara to do this.
Brand names and technology can give you a huge boost in any country. When I am out on the town
in any country, if I request a “Coca Cola” (or Pepsi) I will usually get it. If I want a pizza then that
word is the one I should use across the world. Now, you may have to pronounce them slightly
differently, but trying to say them with less of an accent (see below) will usually help people to
understand them.
If you happen to be learning Romance languages (French, Spanish, Italian, Portuguese, etc.) then
you get thousands of words for free (as an English speaker) due to an influx of French-based
vocabulary during the Norman Conquest of England, and Latin vocabulary due to science and
religion.
These words tend to be used in more formal situations in English, so if you think of a synonym for
the word you want to say that is actually a more technical way of saying it, it may very well be
precisely the same in the target language.
So if someone knocks on your door, you can tell them to come in, or you could say enter. French:
entrer, Spanish: entrar. If you want share your thoughts with someone to show them your point of
view, you could also share your opinion and show them your perspective (Italian: opinione,
Portuguese: perspectiva) (although here, “point de vue” in French is also not far off!). Instead of
showing someone a city, you could be their guide (same in French). Learning vocabulary could be
easy, but it’s better when it’s “simple”!
There are also patterns of particular word-endings working a huge amount of the time. For example,
words ending in -tion in English, are almost always the same in Latin languages. Action, nation,
precipitation, solution, frustration, tradition, communication, extinction and thousands more -tion
words are written exactly the same in French (although the pronunciation changes a bit) and in other
languages only change slightly: Spanish is -ción, Italian is -zione and Portuguese is -on
ão.
There’s also -tude (like gratitude, magnitude), -sion (explosion, expression), -ment (encouragement,
segment), -age (garage, camouflage) and loads more.
You will occasionally run across a false friend, but this is the exception and you will learn these
quite quickly. To get an idea of some words that are actually written exactly the same in English
and French (and would almost always be almost exactly the same in other Romance languages)
look at this list of 1,700 examples in French.
1,700 is not a bad start, but that is actually just for true cognates of not a single letter being
Page 52
different. If you are flexible enough to see what the word looks similar to (exemple, hélicoptère...
porto, capitano... astronom
Wha, Saturno, etc.) you can bring that number to tens of thousands of
words!
ACCENT REDUCTION
Once you are speaking confidently in a language, and even as you are improving towards speaking
confidently, you should try hard to have reduced your foreign accent. This can make you easier to
understand, as well as making the listener more comfortable with speaking to you.
Having less of a strong accent has dramatically helped me to integrate better in foreign cultures. As
with other aspects of learning a language, it can be broken down and analysed.
Your accent is made up of many different components such as word stress, sentence intonation,
rhythm, and even use of particular expressions. Even within a language, each dialect has its own
accent and peculiarities.
The best thing you can do here is to find a native and to have them correct you in the mistakes that
you are making, as well as correcting yourself by repeating phrases aloud after hearing them spoken
by a native. Try to hear the musicality of the sentence as well as its pronunciations
Sounds that don't exist in your mother tongue, but that do in the foreign language, can be learned. It
just takes practice. Usually, the sound can be explained to you in terms of mouth/tongue positions,
and you might have to find a native that is particularly patient (or simply pay them) to sit down with
you for a few hours until you eliminate particular accent issues. This is one of those things with no
quick shortcut, but that does need to be practised. So, I do all of this practise intensively to make
sure I can speak correctly sooner rather than later!
If your native language is English, then one sound you will want to work on immediately is the r
letter (especially if you are learning European languages that also have this letter). An English r
sounds nothing like the equivalent r of the foreign language, and you will need to train yourself to
roll it or make it guttural.
Here are ways to roll the r (as in Spanish, Portuguese, Italian, Slavic languages, and even non-
European languages). You actually have to think of it more like an English l than our r.
Other languages, like French, make it more guttural, so the sound comes from about same position
in your throat as it does for the letter g. Once again, a native can explain precisely how to make
these sounds and tell you when you say it better.
Page 53
INTERVIEWS
There are several hours of interviews included with the Language Hacking Guide that I am sure
you will enjoy! More will be added to later versions, but for the moment you can listen to
discussions with the following people:
•Stu Jay Raj – a very experienced polyglot who covers many topics with me including
memory techniques. Stu Jay has had his own TV show, has worked regularly as an
interpreter for Miss Universe and speaks dozens of languages. Interview time: 54 minutes.
•Khatzumoto from All Japanese All the Time ( www.alljapaneseallthetime.com ). Khatz
learned enough Japanese to work professionally in the language in just a year and a half,
before even going to Japan. I had a 42 minute chat with him to hear more about his
immersion approach that does not even require travel.
•Professor Alexander Arguelles , who has devoted his entire adult life to studying languages
and can read an impressive number of languages and converse in several others. Interview
time: 43 minutes.
••Moses McCormick ( http://www.youtube.com/user/laoshu505000 ) who lives in Columbus,
Ohio, but knows over 40 languages, including many African and Asian ones, nearly all of
which he has learned from home! We were talking for 44 minutes.
Scott H Young - my case study! He has been applying a lot of my suggestions (as explained
on my blog) over his year abroad in France and reached an impressive level of French (his
first foreign language). He explains how he adapted some of my advice to his own
interesting learning strategies, and how he managed to implement my many suggestions
over a realistic time period. Interview time: 29 minutes.
•Damien Elmes – programmer of the Anki application mentioned in this guide and on the
blog. He explains to us how the SRS method works. Interview time: 17 minutes.
Page 54
CONCLUSION
At the end of the day, no matter how good your method and ideas are, the best thing you can do by
far is to learn from the natives themselves and to get them to help you.
I hope that you have enjoyed this guide, and that you will use it just as a starting point to
discovering many other methods that happen to work better for you.
If there are any parts of this you feel like I didn't go into enough detail on, let me know by writing
me an e-mail at benny@irishpolyglot.com.
Even if you don't have any questions, I would love to hear your thoughts about the Language
Hacking Guide. If you have any other ways of learning a language that I should consider, let me
know! I am always open to learning new interesting approaches.
If you purchased this guide to help you with your first language, then please, especially get in touch
with me to tell me that you've had your first conversation with a native much sooner than you
thought you would ;)
Make sure to share your thoughts of this guide on Facebook and Twitter! You can follow more of
my language-hacking tips and adventures as I apply them on my blog www.fluentin3months.com
and on Twitter @irishpolyglot
Looking forward to hearing from you!
- Benny Lewis
Page 55
